 
 
Fockleyr Chregeen aa-orderit 
 
 
liorish  
 
Max W. Wheeler 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lhieggan lhiasit 
Rhumsaa, Mee ny Nollick 2015 
i 
 
 
Archibald Cregeen’s Dictionary of the Manks Language is a major work of lexicography that 
has been used by generations of Manx lea rners since its publication in 1835. The distinctive 
way in which the information is presented in the Dictionary has meant, however, that a good 
deal of its potential value is  not readily apparent to the user. Both the first edition of the 
Dictionary (1835) and t he second (1910) comprise a strictly alphabetical list of word forms . 
This arrangement is particularly valuable for users not entirely familiar with the nature and 
range of variation in the initial letter of Manx words, due to initial consonant mutations, and 
to the addition of consonants (such as d-, g- or n-) before certain forms of vowel-initial verbs. 
A consequence of this strictly alphabetical procedure, though,  is that related forms of the 
same word, or word -family, are scattered throughout the dictio nary. Thus, in a sense, 
Cregeen’s Dictionary as published is more like an index to a lexicon than a lexicon itself. 
 
In the present re-ordering of the entries of the Dictionary, all the lexically related forms are 
grouped together under the heading of a base form or lemma. It thereby becomes possible to 
view in one place  the various inflectional forms of each lexical item, its affixal derivatives, 
and the phrases and compounds containing them. Such a reordering depends, of course, on 
correctly identifying t he word relationships, and I may have made some erroneous 
connections, and missed some links that would be appropriate. I hope users will suggest 
improvements in this respect. Compound words  are repeated under the heading of each 
element: thus ard-ainle ‘archangel’ is included both under ard and under ainle. As this 
edition is prepared for electronic publication, any particular word form in the Dictionary can 
be located by using a Search facility. This regrouping of the dictionary entries also brings to 
the fore the degree to wh ich Cregeen’s work is a source of reference for Manx grammar, as 
the author went to considerable pains to give full illustration 1 of the inflectional variations of 
Manx nouns, verbs, adjectives, and prepositions. Partly this was done just by listing each o f 
the inflectional variants in its strictly alphabetical place, and partly by cross -reference to the 
paragraphs of the introductory ‘Remarks’ that explain the phonological and morphological 
alternations. I suspect that users may not often have followed up thes e references to the 
‘Remarks’ in order to check, for example, the appropriate plural form of nouns. In this 
edition, I have inserted the information about noun plurals from the ‘Remarks’ wherever 
Cregeen used expressions like “pl. 69” or “pl. 71”, which now read: “pl. 69 [change -ey to 
-yn]”; “pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]”. Other cross -references to the introductory ‘Remarks’ 
have been converted to hyperlinks: clicking on a hyperlink will bring up the remark in 
question. Use Alt+LeftArrow to return to the page you clicked from. 
 
Another lexicographical virtue of the Dictionary lies in its citations, of some 200 Manx 
proverbs, and passages from the Manx Bible, plus a few from the Methodist Hymn Book 
Lioar dy Hymnyn, to illustrate the meaning and usage of some of the ent ries. But the value of 
the citations is to some degree diminished in the original publication by the fact that the 
proverbs are included in Manx only, and the other citations contain only the reference to the 
biblical or other passages, not the passag es th emselves. The 1910 edition and subsequent 
reprints do give English translations of the Manx proverbs, and I include these translations 
here also. The present edition, however, incorporates the text of the Biblical passages referred 
to, along with the corre sponding English from the Authorized Version,. Texts of passages 
occasionally cited from other works, such as the Lioar dy Hymnyn, are also included insofar 
                                                 
1 The desire for comprehensiveness in this regard can lead Cregeen to include grammatical forms that one 
doubts can ever have been used, such as “e whid, s. his penises.” 
ii 
 
as I have been able to locate them, with my own English versions, indicated with the initials 
MWW. 
 
Procedures for preparing the new edition 
The text is based on an Optical Character Recognition processing of a PDF scan of the 1835 
edition available from Google Books. I have manually corrected t he OCR output, but some 
errors may have remained undetected . Cregeen’s main entries and inflections in CAPITALS 
have been reproduced in lower case bold type. His accompanying Manx words and cross -
references in italic have been reproduced in lower case italic. There are typographical and 
other manifest errors in the 1835 publication. I indicate elements for suppression between < > 
and corrections and elements for addition between [  ]. Reassembling Cregeen’s material 
under lemmas makes variation in Manx orthography particularly evident. 
 
A notable virtue of the Dictionary is the indication of word stress. In the original this is done 
with a prime sign <´> in or after the stressed syllable , e.g. “ E HAG´GLE, s. her fear” . 
Retaining this indication unaltered would, however, have defeated the aim of making the 
word forms digitally searchable. By default Manx words are stressed on the first syllable , 
while compound words have primary stress on the final element;  thus in most entries the 
stress indication is redundant. In this edition, only Cregeen’s stress indication in a n on-initial 
syllable, or where it might otherwise be unexpected or controversial,  is indicated , with an 
underline, e.g. “abane, s. f. ankle; pl. -yn.”2 There is a considerable degree of inconsistency 
in Cregeen’s marking of stress. Some of this, perhaps all , may correspond to real variation in 
pronunciation. Such variation is particularly noticeable in the agent suffix -eyr: e.g. 
“bwoalteyr, s. m. a striker, &c.; pl. -yn; yn woailteyr, s. 42. the striker or smiter.” Sometimes 
I have drawn attention to what may be a surprising stress indication with “(sic: stress)”. 
 
Reorganizing the entries in lexical groups reveals that in a number of cases the expected 
headword or lemma is missing from Cregeen. For example, among c- words, Cregeen gives 
yn Chaisht, and Jeheiney Chaisht, but not Caisht ‘Easter’; yn chalmane, s. the pigeon, but 
not calmane; cammey a. pl., s’cam, ro chamm, chamm, v., but not camm or cam, a. 
‘crooked’; yn chashtal, s. the castle,  but not cashtal. Missing lemmas are inserted in this 
edition in lower case rom an. On the other hand, Cregeen sometimes gives an apparent cross -
reference to a word or word form that is absent; these are indicated with [deest] (Latin ‘is 
missing’). 
 
Where a word stem has more than one orthographic form, Cregeen marked the form to whic h 
inflections are added with an initial asterisk as in “*BREIG or BREAG, v. coax”. To facilitate 
alphabetical listing and digital searching, the asterisk is here moved to the end, as: “breig* or 
breag, v. coax”. 
 
Cregeen did not use the letter ç, but indicated with figure 5 (referring to §5 of the ‘Remarks’) 
which cases of ch were pronounced with an affricate consonant. In this edition ç has been 
incorporated throughout Cregeen’s text, but not in the citations introduced from the Bible and 
elsewhere. 
 
                                                 
2 There is some loss of information here, since not all polysyllabic words bear a stress mark. But this edition 
does not seek to replace the original, or the 1910 edition. 
iii 
 
Cregeen’s use of capitalization, and hyphenation (e.g. of compound words) is markedly 
inconsistent. Capitalization has been regularized, and suggested hyphenation (of compounds) 
where not already marked is indicated with [-]. 
 
Cregeen often gives the gender of nouns. His gender assignments are not always to be relied 
on, though, and are sometimes contradicted by the evidence of the phrases and citations 
accompanying them. His etymological suggestions are nearly always fanciful and/or 
arbitrary, e.g. “ hoshtal, a. left. Would the etymology of this word be too far fetched, if it 
were said to be from tasht?—the hand kept or stored up more than the other,” “ Boaldyn, s. f. 
May; … The etymology of this word is not well known; some say it is derived from boal (a 
wall), and teine (fire), Irish, in reference to the practice of going round the walls or fences 
with fire on the eve of this day; others, that it is derived from laa bwoailtçhyn, the day cattle 
or sheep are first put to the fold; others, a corruption of blieauntyn, ‘the month of three 
milkings,’ as the Saxons called this month;” “ lhiabbee, s. f. a bed. Some say from liehbee 
(half meat )”; they should not be taken seriously by the modern user. The science of 
etymology was hardly even in its infancy in 1835. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
 
DICT IONARY  
M A N K S L A N G U A G E,  
DOUGLAS :  
BY ARCHIBALD CREGEEN,  
 
Baillym dy loayragh shiu ooilley lesh Glaraghyn, &c .-ST. PAUL . 1 Cor. xiv 5.  
 
IN ENGLISH  ;  
CORRESPONDING WORDS OR EXPLANATIONS  
W I T H  T H E  
O F  T H E   
Arbory , Isle of Man .  
 
M D C C C X X X V. 
INTERSPERSED  WITH MANY GAELIC PROVERBS:  
THE PARTS OF SPEECH, THE GENDERS, AND THE ACCENTS OF THE MANKS WORDS  
ARE CAREFULLY MARKED;  
WITH SOME ETYMOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS, NEVER BEFORE PUBLISHED.  
P R I N T E D  A N D  P U B L I S H E D  F O R  T H E  A U T H O R ,  
BY J. QUIGGIN, NORTH -QUAY ;  
W H I TT A K E R ,  T R E A C H E R ,  A N D  A R N O T ,  L O N D O N ;  
EVANS, CHEGWIN, AND HALL, LIVERPOOL.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREFACE.  
THE following Vocabulary of the Manks language has been compiled with 
considerable labour and assiduity. It is designed to facilitate the attainment of 
that ancient lang uage, and to furnish the reader not only with a variety of 
vocables, idiomatic phrases, and proverbial expressions, but also the outlines of 
a Manks Grammar.  
That a language so venerable for its antiquity and so estimable on many 
accounts should be so gen erally neglected, is much to be lamented. The 
consequence of this neglect has been, that numerous corruptions have crept into 
the dialect in general use, and so many anglicisms been adopted, that the Manks 
is now seldom spoken or written in its original pu rity. Despised and neglected, 
however, as the language appears to be at present, it is susceptible of high 
improvement, and justly entitled to the attention of the scholar. The sublime 
strains of OSSIAN mark the capabilities of the language, and commend i t to the 
regard of the philologist as a subject of curious enquiry, and deserving accurate 
investigation.  
At the present period, when this interesting little Island promises to become 
once more the abode of science and literature, it is hoped that Gaelic learning 
will revive, and that every facility will be afforded for the acquisition of a 
language so essentially necessary within the pre cincts of Mona to the students 
of Divinity, and the students of Law. To both these classes, it is presumed, the 
compilation now offered to the public will prove an important acquisition. Such 
a publication has long been a desideratum in Manks literature, and possesses fair 
claims to general acceptance. Whilst the natives of Wales and the natives of 
North Britain are enthus iastically attached to the language of their forefathers, 
let it not be said that the natives of Mona regard “Çhengey ny mayrey Vannin veg 
veen” with disgraceful apathy and heartless indif ference. As long as the Manks 
Bible and the Manks Liturgy remain th ey will testify that our ancestors thought 
and felt more correctly.  
 
 
 
PREFACE.  
Amongst the numerous literary advantages which “King William's College” 
is expected to afford the sons of Mona, it is devoutly to be wished that the 
cultivation of the vernacular tongue be not overlooked. The establishment of a 
professorship for that specific object would be highly desirable, —such an 
arrangement would be in perfect unison with the pious and benevolent design 
of the Founder of the Academic Fund, whose primary obje ct appears to have 
been to prepare candidates for the Holy Ministry in the Isle of Man, and thus 
promote the highest and best interests of the country.  
If the following work should contribute in the smallest degree to advance so 
important an end, the Comp iler will have reason to regard his labour as well 
bestowed.  
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
TO THE 
 
MANKS LANGUAGE.  
I AM well aware that the utility or the following work will be variously appreciated by my 
brother Manksmen. Some will be disposed to deride the endeavour  to restore vigour to a 
decaying language. Those who reckon the extirpation of the Manks a necessary step towards 
that general extension of the English, which they deem essential to the interest of the Isle of 
Man, will condemn every effort which seems likely to retard its extinction.  
But those will think otherwise who consider that there are thousands of the natives of the 
Island that can at present receive no useful knowledge whatever, except through the medium of 
the Manks language; they will judge from  experience, as well as from the nature of the case, 
that no work of this description will hinder the progress of the English, but in fact have the 
contrary effect.  
It is obvious, that when tribes of men are intermixed who speak different languages, a great 
part of the knowledge which man should afford his neighbour must be diminished. The 
Magistrate cannot address his suitors, —the Pastor his flock, but through the imperfect medium 
of an interpreter. Lawyers, Divines, Physicians, Merchants, Manufacturers, and Farmers, all feel 
more or less this inconvenience when they transact business with whom they have no language 
in common.  
To remedy such defect, the following Manks Dictionary, with the corresponding words in 
English, may, it is hoped by the Compiler, contribute in some degree to facilitate the acquisition 
of both the Manks and English languages; and, if received with indulgence, may be followed by 
its counterpart, “EN G L I S H  R E N D E R E D  I N T O  M A N K S.”  
To place the present publication within the reach of the  peasantry of the Isle of Man, it has 
been greatly abridged from what was at first purposed by the author; notwithstanding which, it is 
hoped will give general satisfaction, and be a standing memorial of that very ancient language—
the Manks or Gaelic, to generations yet unborn; as it may with a degree of truth be asserted that 
we have little more than two-thirds of the language preserved in the published translation of the 
Scriptures and the Church Liturgy.  
The following Remarks of Reference, with the work itself, will enable the reader to form 
some idea of the construction of the language.  
 
1 
 
Remarks, to which are annexed figures of reference. 
 
Of the letters and their sounds. 
1. THE Alphabet consists of seventeen single and 
three double consonants, and s even vowels —a, e, 
i, o, u, w, y . Of the consonants, fifteen are 
mutable—b, c, çh, d, f, g, j, k, m, p, q, s, sh, sl, t. 
The immutables are —l, n, r, which always retain 
their sound; and alter not, except when preceded by 
s in the beginning of a word to sho w the degrees of 
comparison. Gh and ph begin no radical, or at least 
ought to begin none, as the language now stands; 
although there are words that are so written: these 
are shown where they occur in the work, and will 
be seen only to be aspirations, gh of g and of d, and 
ph of p. Sh and sl must be considered double 
consonants as they have a change peculiar to 
themselves, and differ from the other radical 
initialled s’s. The v is considered a secondary mute.  
2. A is reckoned a broad vowel, and in some 
words sounded as o, as in CLAGH (a stone), clogh; 
and as u, as in GOAN (scarce), goun. It is 
pronounced as a in the English words of man, pan; 
as, BAD, LAD, BAB, &c.; and when circumflexed, as 
in mâroo, sârey, is sounded as in matron, &c.  
3. B is a labial, or lip-letter, and pronounced as b, 
in English; as, BARE, BOAYL.  
4. C preserves a strong sound in its unaspi rated 
state, as the English k, or as c in can; as,  CAM, 
CAPPAN. It never, however, usurps the 
pronunciation of s, as in the English words cistern, 
city, cedar, &c.  
5. ÇH has a soft sound, as in ÇHAGHTER, 
ÇHARBAA, ÇHINGYS; like ch in English, in cherry, 
charcoal, chime, &c.  
6. CH has a hard or harsh sound, which sound is 
not in the English language. I cannot express it 
better than by a word which I wo uld write or spell 
egh or egg-yth, and a, CHA (not); and which sound 
would go through with the vowels, thus: egh e, 
CHE; egh i, CHI; egh o, CHO; egh u, CHU; egh y, 
CHY; and with CHLA, CHLE, &c.; and CHRA, CHRE, 
&c., &c.  
7. D is pronounced as d, in English , in drone, 
dunnal, &c.  
8. But d, in other words, as if written and 
pronounced dh, as in DAA, DOO, &c.3  
9. E is reckoned a small vowel, but is sometimes 
sounded long, and sometimes short; the latter sound 
as heard in men, ten, bed (in English) answers to  
the Manks BEN, REN, SHEN, &c.  
                                                 
3 In §§ 7 and 8 Cregeen appears to refer to a 
contrast between a voice d alveolar plosive (§7) and 
a voiced dental plosive (§8), the default 
pronunciation corresponding to d or dh. 
10. The long or circumflexed e, as in mêriu, t’êh, 
tê, vê, &c., like the English they, bey ; or as a in 
way, hay, say, &c.  
11. F is called a weak consonant; because, when 
aspirated, it loses all its force; as FEA (rest); E E A 
(his rest). It corresponds in many cases with v; and 
has the English sound in FA, FAASE, FOAYS, &c.  
12. G is a heavy consonant, and pronounced as 
g, in English, in gain, get, go ; as, GAMMAN, 
GOAILL, GARRISH; but has no soft sound as in the 
words gentle, generous, &c.  
13. When g is aspirated to gh, it is reckoned a 
light consonant, and has a guttural sound; no such 
sound is in the English language; and although gh is 
in ghost and ghastly, they are only sounded gost, 
gastly.  
14. H is pronounced as h in t he words hand, 
hind, hold, &c. in English. Some would rather call 
h an auxiliary than a letter. because it rarely begins 
any radical word except a few small ones, as, 
HANNAH, HYM, &c., and serves only to aspirate the 
other consonants, as, ch, gh, mh, ph, th, &c.; or the 
vowels, as, ha, he, hi, &c. When it aspirates from t, 
followed by an r, it is often sounded as ch, as E 
HRAA (his time); E HROO (his envy); &c. It is an 
initial in feminine genitive nouns; as, E HEDDIN (her 
face); E HAIGNEY (her mind or will); E HENNYM (her 
name). The masculine of those would be E EDDIN 
(his face); E AIGNEY (his mind); E ENNYM (his 
name).  
15. I is one of the small vowels, and pro nounced 
as i (in English) in pin, win, sin; as, SHIMMEY, SHID, 
SHILLEY.  
16. J is pronounced exac tly like the soft English 
g, and is perfectly uniform in its sound.  
17. K. This letter has precisely the sound of hard 
c, in English, and is never silent as the Eng lish k in 
knee, knave, know, &c.  
18. L. Some say this letter admits of no 
aspiration, and is pronounced as l (in English) in 
law, live, love ; as, LAUE, LIOAR, LANE; but I think 
there is a distinction between lie or ly in English 
and LHIE in Manks; and had the words LOO, LOOR, 
&c., been spelled or written  LHOO and LHOOR, they 
would have answered  the Manks pronunciation 
better; for without the h the sound is too narrow, 
except to those who know that they require that 
sound.  
19. M is a strong consonant, but it is often 
changed into v; and when it is followed by w, oo, or 
u, it changes to v or w, when aspirated.  
20. N is sounded as n in English; it is never 
aspirated nor eclipsed, but yet called a light 
2 
 
consonant, and is often doubled to give the greater 
sound.  
21. O is a broad vowel; when acuted as o in 
gone, in English, answers the Manks SON, CRON, 
&c.  
22. When o is circumflexed as in bone, shone, 
open, &c., thus ÔNEY, ÔYR, &c. Manks.4  
23. O before l in the Manks, sounds OHL.  
24. P. This is a hard consonant, and pronounced 
as p in English.  
25. PH is sounded as the English f.  
26. Q, which is always followed by u, has the 
sound of kw. 
27. R is a light consonant, and pronounced as r 
in English; but some times when an initial, it 
requires to be sounded as if written rh; as, RED (a 
thing), RHED.  
28. S, although called the queen of consonants, is 
subject to many changes, as shown in Remarks 55, 
56, 57, 58, 111, 112, 161, &c. It sounds as (in 
English) savor, sense—SAGGYRT—SOLLAN.  
29. T. This is a hard consonant, naturally 
commuted, with d as, DY GERRRID, for DY GERRIT.  
30. When t is an initial bef ore a vowel, it 
requires to be sounded as if written th.5  
31. U is one of the three broad vowels with a and 
o, and sounded as u (in English) in cumber; as, CUM 
(hold). 
32. V is not properly a radical initial consonant; 
but only a secondary mute. However, we have 
some few words which begin with v as a radical; as, 
VAJDJYN, VEIH, &c.  
33. W. Though I have set down this letter as a 
vowel, I know of no syllable or word without 
another vowel attached to it, with consonants, to 
make a word or syllable. The Welsh  have it a 
vowel, without any support. Its sound is as oo (in 
English) in boot, soot, root; as, WARDOON, WARP, 
WARREE.  
34. Y. This letter as a vowel and a consonant is 
too frequently used in the Manks. Its first or 
primary sound would be as i (in English)  in bind, 
bile, &c. 
35. But y has another sound as u, and is as i (in 
English) in bird, third, —answering to the sound in 
SPYRRYD, YMMYRCHAGH, YNRICAN, &c. in Manks.  
                                                 
4 The distinction in §§21 and 22 seems to be 
between a short /o/ (§21) and long /oː/ (§22, [oː] or 
[ɔː]). 
5 I.e. a dental stop rather than an alveolar. 
36. This letter has the sound of e in the word the 
(in English); as, DY, DTY, MY, BY, &c.  
37. Y some times has the sound of ee, as in the 
English, barley, belly, stingy, &c.; as, LHEIY, GUIY, 
SEIY, &c. 
38. Such words as begin with mutable or 
changeable consonants, viz.: b, c, çh, d, f, g, j, k, m, 
p, q, s, sh, sl, and t, change these their radical initial 
letters as occasion require, and according to the 
effect the preceding words have on them.  
39. The letter a, as an initial in radical verbs, 
changes to d, or rather has d placed before it, as 
shown in Remark 60 ; and t o g, (or has g placed 
before it) as shown in Remark 61; and also changes 
to n, (or has n placed before it) to show the preterit 
or past time of the action of the verb: and so of all 
the vowels when radical initials. —See Remark 
119, &c.  
40. But the letter a and all the vowels change to 
h (or have h placed before them) to show the 
genitive or ownership case of the feminine gender, 
as may be seen under the h in the work, and in 
Remark 14.  
41. Words, primarily beginning with b, have 
three initials, viz.: b, v, m; as, BRAAR (a brother); E 
VRAAR (his brother); NYN MRAAR (your, &c. 
brother); &c, &c. 
42. But when the second letter after the b is w, 
oo, or u, such words change to w or v as an in itial; 
as, BOOIAGH (willing or pleased); FEER WOOIAGH 
(very willing or pleased, &c.); and BWOAILLEE (a 
fold); E WOAILLEE (his fold); BUIGHEY (jaundice); 
YN WUIGHEY or VUIGHEY (the jaundice or yellows).  
43. Words beginning with c have three initials, 
viz.: c, ch, and g; as, CARREY (a friend); E CHARREY 
(his friend); NYN GARREY (your, &c. friend).  
44. Words beginning with çh have also three 
initials, viz.: çh, h, and j; as, ÇHENGEY (a tongue); E 
HENGEY (his tongue); NYN JENGEY (your, &c. 
tongue), &c.  
45. W ords initialled by d have two, viz.: d and 
gh; as, DOOINNEY (a man); E GHOOINNEY (his man), 
&c.  
46. Words radically initialled by E, have four, 
and so have all the other vowels: the initial vowel, 
and three others. viz.: e, or the other vowel, and d, 
g, and n; EECK (pay); DEECK (paid or did pay); 
GEECK (paying). See Remarks 60  and 61; and ER 
NEECK (hath or having, &c. paid). See also a change 
mentioned in Remark 40.  
47. Some words commen cing with e, radically, 
for better sound’s sake begin with y; as, EEAST (a 
fish), YEEAST; EEAN (a chicken), YEEAN, &c.  
3 
 
48. Words beginning with f have nine or more 
changes. viz.: d and v, and the first vowel or 
consonant after the f, if the preceding word  change 
it.  
49. Words radically initialled by g have two, as g 
and gh; as, GEAY (wind); YN GHEAY (the wind). G 
also sometimes changes to y; as, GIARE (short); RO 
YIARE (too short), though sometimes spelled 
GHIARE; GIALL (white or bright); RO YIALL (too 
bright). This and others are also written RO GHIALL, 
&c.  
50. Words commencing with j have two initials, 
j and y as, JEE (God); E YEE, (his God); &c.  
51. Words initialled with k have three, viz.: k, ch, 
and g; as, KEYREY (a sheep); E CHEYREY (his 
sheep); NYN GEYREY (your, &c. sheep), &c.  
52. M, beginning words has but two initials. viz.: 
m and v; as, MOYRN (pride); E VOYRN (his pride), 
&c.  
53. P, beginning words has three initials. viz.: p, 
ph, and b; as, POOAR (power); E PHOOAR (his 
power); NYN BOOAR (your, &c. power), &c.  
54. Q, beginning radicals, has three initials, viz.: 
q, wh, and g; as, QUAIYL (a court); E WHUAIYL (his 
court); NYN GUAIYL (your, &c. court), &c.  
55. S, beginning words radically, has many 
changes, viz.: s, h, t, as SOOILL (an eye); E HOOILL 
(his eye); YN TOOILL (the eye).  
56. And if s be followed by h, it changes to çh 
and h; as, SHENN GHOOINNEY (an old man); YN 
ÇHENN GHOOINNEY  (the old man);  E HENN 
GHOOINNEY (his old man).  
57. When s is followed by l, it changes to cl and 
l; as, SLAT (a rod); YN CLAT (the rod); E LAT (his 
rod, &c.)  
58. The letter s, apostrophized before adjectives 
and participles, I think is an abbreviation of SMOO, 
by which the degrees of comparison are shown 
throughout the language; first, the positive, 
FIRRINAGH (true); secondly, a degree above the 
positive; as, S’FIRRINAGH (how true); thirdly, the 
comparative, NY S’FIRRINEE  (more true); fourthly, 
the superlative, YN RAA S’FIRRINEE (the truest 
saying). 
59. T, beginning words radically, has three 
initials, viz.: t, h, and d; as, TOWSE (a measure); E 
HOWSE (his measure); NYN DOWSE (your, &c. 
measure).  
Of verbs. 
60. Verbs commencing radically with vowels, 
begin with d to show the preterit or past time of 
action, or negatively; as, AARL or AARLEE (cook, 
dress, or prep are); DAARLEE (did cook, dress, or 
prepare); and negatively, CHA DAARLEE, &c.; and 
EOYLLEE (dung or manure); DEOYLLEE (did dung, 
or manure); and CHA DEOYLLEE, &c. 
61. Verbs beginning in like manner with vowels, 
to show the present and also the past time of  action, 
begin with g; as, AASE (grow); GAASE (growing); 
VA MEE GAASE (I was growing); IRREE (rise); &c.  
62. Of verbs irregular, which do not altogether 
change according to the foregoing remarks.— 
ÇHEET (coming), changes to HAINK, DAINK, HIG, 
JIG, HARR, DARR, HEET, JEET, TAR.  
CLASHTYN (hearing), CLASHT, CHLASHTYN, 
CHEAYLL, CLUIN, CHLUIN, GEAYLL, GLUIN.  
CUR, or COYRT (giving, putting, sending, &c.), 
CHOYRT, HUG, DUG, VER and VERR, DER 
and DERR.  
FAKIN (seeing), AKIN, FAIK, HEE, HONNICK, VAIK, 
VAKIN, N’AIKIN. 
GEDDYN (getting), GHEDDYN, FOW, HOOAR, 
DOOAR, YIO, YIOGH, YIOW, NOW, VOW, 
VOGH. 
GOAILL (taking), GHOAILL, GO, GHO, GOW, 
GHOW, N’GHOAILL. 
GOLL (going), HIE, HEM, HEU, HOOIN, GOW, 
RAGH, JAGH, JED, JEM, JE’OO, N’GHOLL, 
GHOLL. 
GRA (saying), ABBYR, DOOYRT, GHRA, JIR, and 
JIRR, YIAR and YIARR, N’ABBYR, N’YIARR. 
JANNOO (doing), JEAN, JIN and JINN, YINN, 
N’YANNOO.  
63. The regular verbs change their initials 
according to what has been said on the changing of 
the letters and their terminations, as specified in 
Remarks 77-88.  
Of plurals. 
64. Of the forming of plurals in  the Manks, the 
addition of YN to the singular is the most common, 
which is shown after the singulars through the 
work. Have the plurals housen, (which was 
formerly used as the plural in the English for 
houses), oxen, men, women, children, &c., any 
analogy to this? Undoubtedly they have. 
65. Other words are formed into plurals by the 
addition of AGHYN to the singulars; these, for the 
most part, are given in the work after their 
singulars.  
66. There are other words that only require GHYN 
to be added to the singular.  
67. Some singular words, ending in EY, change 
the EY to AGHYN, to pluralize them; as, CAGGEY 
(war); CAGGAGHYN (wars); COONEY (help); 
COONAGHYN (helps), &c.  
68. Other words ending in EY change the Y to 
EYN; as, BUNNEY (sheaf); BUNNEEYN (sheaves), &c. 
69. Other singulars ending in E and EY, change 
the E and EY to YN; as, PAITÇHEY (a child); 
4 
 
PAITÇHYN (children); FOCKLE (a word); FOCKLYN 
(words).  
70. Some few singulars ending in LEY, change  
the LEY to JYN; as, BILLEY (a tree); BILJYN (trees); 
BALLEY (a town or estate); BALJYN (towns or 
estates), &c.  
71. The termination of singulars in AGH, for the 
most part to pluralize them, changes the AGH to EE; 
as, GIMMAGH (a lobster); GIMMEE (lobsters), &c.  
72. The ending of singulars in AGH, AGHT, IN, or 
YN, sometimes changes to EEYN; as, EADDAGH 
(woollen cloth); EADDEEYN (woollen cloths); 
CLADDAGH, singular; CLADDEEYN, plural; 
CURNAGHT (wheat); CURNEEYN (wheats); SKILLIN 
(a shilling); SKILLEEYN (shillings).  
73. There are other formations of plurals in the 
middle of words; as, MAC (a son); MEC (sons). 
74. Others by changing OA or O [or OY] to UI; as, 
DOARN (a fist); DUIRN (fists); STOYL (a stool); 
STUILL (stools).  
75. The changing of E to I makes plural in some 
words; as, FER to FIR, &c.  
76. There are other words that require the change 
of Y to I; as , CABBYL (a horse); CABBIL (horses), 
&c. 
 
Of the termination of verbs. 
77. Of the termination of verbs, or the 
compounding of auxiliary verbs, pronouns, &c., to 
the verbs. -AGH, added to a verb, is used with all the 
nominative pronouns, except I; as, he, EH; they, AD; 
we, SHIN; she, EE; you, SHIU; thou, OO, &c., as the 
words may require; and means would or wouldst, 
could or couldst, might or mightest, &c., do the 
action of the verb; or would or wouldst, &c., not do 
the action of the verb; as the verb BERR (overtake); 
BERRAGH EH  (he would, &c., overtake); or, CHA 
BERRAGH OO (thou wouldst not overtake); &c., &c. 
78. AIL, joined to a verb, signifies ing in 
English; as, BAAR (spend); BAARAIL (spending); 
FAAG (leave); FAAGAIL (leaving); &c.  
79. AL, added to a verb, has the same meaning as 
AIL, ing, in English, and may be termed the grand 
Manksifier-general of English verbs; as, trying, 
TRYAL; fixing, FIXAL, &c., &c.; but not to the credit 
or honour of those who so make use of it.  
80. EE. This added to a verb, and used with the 
nominative pronouns (except I or she) means will 
or wilt, shall or shalt, perform the action of the verb 
to which it is annexed; or will or shall not perform 
the action of the verb, as set forth in remark 77, on 
AGH; that is, would; and this is, will and shall do.  
81. EIL. This, as well as AIL and AL, when added 
to a verb, means ing; as, DOOYTEIL (doubting) I 
TREISHTEIL (trusting).  
82. EY. This syllable, also added to a verb, 
corresponds to the English ing, or the doing or 
performing the action of the verb to which it is 
annexed; as, GOBBRAGHEY (working); FL[IU]GHEY 
(wetting), &c.  
83. IN. This termination, which alw ays requires 
to be sounded as if written ihn,6 partakes of the 
nature of the auxiliary verb would and the pronoun 
I; as, BERR (overtake); BERRIN (I would overtake), 
and when so joined together is called pronominal.  
84. INS. This termination to a verb is t he 
emphatic, absolute, certain, especial or particular of 
the preceding IN, in that case to the verb to which 
annexed, and always requires to be sounded as if 
written ihns; BERR (overtake); BERRINS (I would, 
emphatically, absolutely, or certainly, &c. 
overtake).  
85. IT or T. These terminations, which answer to 
the English ed, must, to retain the proper Manks 
sound, be pronounced as if written iht, and ht, and 
partake of the nature of an adjective. Added to a 
verb it becomes a participle. There are many wor ds 
of this part of speech in English that do not admit of 
ending in ed; as, grown, found, lost, worn, &c.; yet 
these all end in it or t in  the Manks; as, AASIT, 
FEDDYNIT, CAILT or CAILLIT, CEAUT, &c.  
86. YM. This syllable, which partakes of the 
nature of the pronoun I and the auxiliary verb will, 
added to a verb, signifies that I will do or suffer the 
action of the verb to which applied; as, BERR 
(overtake); BERRYM (I will overtake), &c.  
87. YMS, it may be said, is the same to YM, as 
INS is to IN, the abs olute, certain, especial or 
emphatic of YM; as, BERR (overtake); BERRYMS (I 
will emphatically overtake). 
88. YS. This termination, and EE, added to verbs, 
is nearly of the same import; but it is my opinion 
that the YS means shall or shalt do the action of the 
verb; and EE, will and wilt; but the translators of the 
Scriptures into our language use it for both. This 
syllable, added to a verb, should always be 
employed where two or more words that are 
sounded alike happen together; as, EE EE EE  (she 
will eat). When these occur, we generally say EE YS 
EE (she shall or will eat). This postfix is 
undoubtedly used in the subjunctive mood for eat, 
eats, eateth, eatest, &c.; as, MY EEYS , EH, AD, OO, 
&c. (if he eats, if they eat, if thou eatest); MY EEYS 
DOOINNEY (if a man eat, shall eat, or eateth); and so 
of other verbs. In Genesis ii. 17, we have SON ER Y 
                                                 
6 Cregeen apparently intends to indicate ‘slender’ 
pronunciation of n. Compare what he says below 
about ‘iht’ ([itj], §85) and ‘ihd’ ([idj] §89). 
5 
 
LAA EEYS OO JEH  (for in the day thou eatest 
thereof); and in the iv. chap. 15, it is, QUOI ERBEE 
VARRYS CAIN (whosoever slayeth Cain). This 
termination is also use d in apposition; as, SHOH YN 
DOOINNEY OBBYRYS DIU (this is the man that will or 
shall work for you).  
 
Of adjectival nouns. 
89. Of the forming of adjectival nouns, or 
substantives made of adjectives, in the Manks, by 
the addition or changing of a syllable in the 
termination of a word, corresponding to the English 
ness, ty, &c. —The most common of these are ID 
and D, which require to retain the Manks sound, 
and [are] pronounced as if written IHD, and HD. 
These syllables are sometimes added to the 
adjective; as, BIOYR (brisk); BIOYRID (briskness); 
BOUYR (deaf); BOUYRID (deafness); MOOAR (big or 
great); MOOAD (greatness), &c. 
90. Some adjectival nouns are made by a part of 
the adjective being changed; as, JOOIGH (greedy); 
JOOID (greediness); BERÇHAGH (rich), BERÇHID 
(richness), &c.  
91. Other adjectives are changed for the most 
part; as, GIALL (bright or white): GILLID 
(brightness); MARROO (dead); MERRIUID 
(deadness), &c. 
92. Some other adjectives require JID in place of 
the latter syllable; as, MILLISH (sweet); MILJID 
(sweetness); YRJID (heighth or highness), &c. 
93. YS and S are sometimes added to the 
adjective, and at other times placed instead of the 
last syllable or part; as, DORRAGHEY (dark); 
DORRAGHYS (darkness); though the change to ID, in 
Remark 89, is s ometimes used; as, DORRID 
(darkness); and YNRICK (upright, or sincere); 
YNRICKYS (uprightness), &c.  
94. For sake of abridging the work, the reader is 
desired, in reference to derivative verbs and their 
conjunction into pronominals, with the auxiliary 
verbs shall, will, would, &c., to look to the radical 
verb, as the letter placed at the end of the 
explanation shows the initial from which the 
branch-word is derived; and the figures of reference 
under the radical answer the meaning in the same 
manner. 
Of peculiarities. 
95. There are several principles peculiar to the 
idiom or phraseology of the Manks language, when 
compared with the English; such as the 
unnecessariness of the indefinite article a, in 
general.  
96. One peculiarity is, that the Manks pos sesses 
a plural article, NY (the); as, NY DEINEY (the men); 
NY CLAGHYN (the stones): Y and YN are the singular 
definite articles. The collective nouns, such as, 
OLLAGH (cattle); SLEIH (people); LUGHT-THIE 
(household or family); MAASE (kine), &c., are, as in 
the E nglish, not reckoned plural nouns; therefore, 
have only the definite article YN preceding them.  
97. A grand principle in Manks is the adjective 
being placed after the noun or substantive. In 
English, the adjective has precedence; therefore the 
quality of a thing is mentioned before the thing 
itself; but in Manks (more agreeable to reason and 
common sense) the substantive precedes the 
adjective; as, CABBYL MIE  (a good horse); BOOA 
GHOO (a black cow); MAGHER MOOAR (a big field). 
There are a few exceptions.  
98. In possessing a plural adjective, the Manks 
again has an advantage over the English, (there 
being no difference in the adjectives of singular and 
plural in that language); as, DEINEY MOOAREY (big 
or great men); CROINK ARDEY (high hills); THIEYN 
BEGGEY (little houses), &c.  
99. Another, is the derivative adjective, as I have 
called it, of or belonging to a thing. My reason for 
distinguishing this class of adjectives from others 
is, that there are some nouns that have two 
adjectives which differ materiall y in their meaning; 
for instance, the sun; as, LAA GRIANAGH (a sunny, 
or sun -shiny day). which I have left a common 
adjective; but GREINEY, I have marked an adjective 
derivative, of or belonging to the sun; as , CHIASS 
GREINEY (the heat of the sun, or the sun’s heat); and 
GLION (a glen or valley); GLIONNAGH (having glens 
or valleys); GLIONNEY (of or belonging to the 
valley); as, FIEE NY GLIONNEY  (the ravens of the 
valley); and CASSAGH (having feet, or footed); as, 
MAASE KIARE CASSAGH (four-footed kine); COSHEY 
(of the foot or feet). The English of this class of 
adjectival words are aspen, hempen, oaken, 
baptismal, &c.  
100. Another principle is, the language not 
making plural until three; the numbers of twenty, 
forty, sixty, eighty, a hundred, a thousand, &c.  
These are not twenty or forty men, but, literally 
twenty man, &c. And I think the YN to 
SHIAGHTINYN redundant, as in Daniel ix. 25-26.7  
101. Another and grand principle is, the 
emphatic: some instances of this are given in the 
work; but any substantive, &c. may be made 
emphatical by adding ’s. which requires to be 
sounded es to the substantive, &c.; as, DTY CHREE’S 
(thy heart, emphatically); DTY OBBYR ’S (thy work, 
                                                 
7 Veih goll magh y sarey, dy yannoo ass -y-noa, as 
dy hroggal Jerusalem reesht gys Messiah yn prince 
bee shiaght shiaghtinyn, as lurg  three-feed 
shiaghtinyn as jees, bee'n straid as y voalley er 
nyn droggal reesht, eer rish earishyn seaghnagh.  
As lurg three -feed shiaghtinyn as jees bee Messiah 
er ny yiarey jeh… 
6 
 
emphatically), &c. In the English, the reader is left 
at sea without a compass, if he has no t learned 
where to lay the emphasis, as few of the words 
differ in their form in that language for being 
emphatic; when unemphatical, thy is to be sounded 
the, and my, me, &c.  
102. The substantives being all masculine or 
feminine, is another; there being no such anomaly 
in Manks as a neuter gender; we have however a 
few nouns, pronouns, and pronominals common to 
both genders. Some will have it that every word in 
the language is either masculine or feminine.  
103. The verbs running into auxiliary 
terminations and pronominals; as, AGH, AIL, AL, EIL, 
EY, IN, INS, IT, YN, YMS, and YS, as are shown by the 
remarks of reference throughout the work, is 
another principle.  
104. The adjectives and participles throughout 
the language requiring to be brought under the 
letter s’ to show the degrees of comparison, as set 
forth in the 58th Remark , [and as] exemplified in 
the work under that letter, is another.  
105. The greatest difficulty to attain, by a person 
that did not learn it when young, is t he changing of 
the initials of mutable consonants, and of vowel 
letters, or the pronunciation of secondary mutes or 
aspirations. There is very little occasion for such 
changing in the English; but to give an English 
scholar some idea of it, it may be necessary to show 
him something similar in his own language. The 
words from home require no change; but let him say 
at home, and he can hardly say home without a 
hiatus, or longer stop than ought to be; he will be 
very apt to say at tome: this is changing the h to t in 
speaking. Or let him say at all, and if he be not very 
careful he will say at tall, or a tall; this is changing 
the a to t. Or let him say the words, make haste, and 
he will be very apt to say make kaste ; this is 
changing the h to k; and it is, he will be apt to say it 
tis; this is changing i to t.  
106. And the article an, which is nothing more 
than the article a with an n to come between it and 
the word initialled by a vowel, if it were placed 
before the vowel in the word would amount to 
nearly t he same thing; then an egg would be a 
negg; and an awl would be a nawl; an eye would be 
a neye, &c, &c.; these are somewhat like the 
changing of the initials in the Manks.  
 
Of mutable initials.8 
107. The force of the pronunciation of secondary 
or auxiliary mutes (as they are called) is so different 
from that of the primary or radical, that they are 
                                                 
8 The main headings of the consonant mutations are 
here set in bold type. 
expressed by different figures or letters in the 
Manks; from whence arises often the difficulty of 
finding the etymology of those words that branch or 
are derived from a radical. The Irish, to prevent this 
in their language, have a dot, point, or dash, &c. 
placed over or below the letter; that is, as if b or m 
required to be sounded v. The primary or radical are 
always retained, but known by the dash or dot, so 
that the etymology of words is easily found in that 
language.  
108. Of the causes of the changing of the 
mutable initials, (d, j, and t, excepted). Words of 
the feminine gender change their following 
words; as, CLAGH VANE  (a white stone); which 
would, if CLAGH were masculine, be CLAGH BANE; 
LAUE YESH  (right hand); if LAUE were masculine, 
would be LAUE JESH; AWIN VEG; now if AWIN were 
of the masculine gender, it would be AWIN BEG ; 
AWIN VOOAR , or WOOAR (a big or great river) if 
masculine it would be MOOAR; so that the 
adjectives BANE, JESH, BEG, MOOAR, are the primary 
or radical adjectives, which are changed, by 
feminine substantives being placed before them, to 
VANE, YESH, VEG, VOOAR. From these examples the 
learner will see that it is of the utmost importance , 
in order to write and speak the language correctly, 
that he should know and be well acquainted not 
only with the names and words, but also with their 
genders.  
109. Words initialled by vowels are subject to 
changes, as explained in Remarks 60  and 61. 
Mutable consonants being initials are also 
changeable, to show the preterit , without any 
word before them; as, BAIH (drown); but to show 
the pass time of action I must change BAIH to VAIH; 
VAIH EH EH ’SY CHEAYN (he drowned or did drown 
him in the sea); and GOW (take); GHOW EH OOILLEY 
NY V’AYM VOYM (he took all I had from me, or he 
did take all I had from me); and JERK (hope, trust, 
or expect); I must change JERK to YERK; YERK MEE 
RISH, AS VA MEE MOLLIT (I trusted or expected him, 
and he deceived me); and MOL (deceive); AGH VOL 
EH MEE  (but he deceived me). BAIH, GOW, JERK, 
MOL, are thus changed to their aspirations, VAIH, 
GHOW, YERK, VOL, &c.  
110. Another cause of change is the vocative 
case, O YEE ! JEE (God) is he re changed to YEE. 
TAR MARYM , VRAAR (come with me, brother); 
BRAAR is here changed to VRAAR. O HIE YACOB, (O 
house of Jacob); the t in THIE and the J in JACOB are 
here changed. JEAN is changed to YEAN and JUAN 
to YUAN, &c, &c.  
111. Changes made by the art icles Y and YN 
being placed before radical words, most of those 
initialled by vowels, borrow, as it were, the N from 
YN, in the pronunciation. The translators of the 
Scriptures have given another n to AH, or AA 
(second); as, YN NAH (the second); and according to 
7 
 
this rule, YN AALL  (the flesh fork) should be YN 
NAALL; YN OLLAGH  (the cattle), YN NOLLAGH ; YN 
USHTEY (the water), YN NUSHTEY ; &c.; but they 
have not been uniform in this rule, having given it 
to some words and withheld it from others.  
Y and YN [preceding nouns of the feminine 
gender] when placed before b change it to v; c to 
ch; f to the second letter whether vowel or 
consonant; but the want of change in some of these 
is so faint that perhaps it would be better to retain 
the f in some than to omit it. G changes to gh; k to 
ch; m to v; which last, often in conversation, slides 
into w. P changes to ph; qu to wh; s to t; sh to çh; sl 
to cl; Y and YN do not change çh, d, j, and t.  
112. The pronoun  E (his), changes the 
following mutable initials , viz.: b to v (and w, 
when oo, u, or w immediately follow); c to ch; çh to 
h; d to gh; and f similar to what is said on that letter 
in the preceding Remark. G to gh; j to y; k to ch; m 
to v; and which last, as shown in the preceding 
Remark, often slides into w in conversation. P to 
ph; qu to wh; s and sh to h; sl to l; t to h. All the 
mutables change by the above pronoun.  
113. The pronoun E (her), on the contrary, 
changes none of the mutables; but changes words 
initialled by vowels, by requiring h to be placed 
before them.  
114. The words DY (to), DTY (thy), and MY, 
change the mutables  exactly in the same manner 
as E (his) does, as shown in Remark 112.  
115. The changes caused by placing the adverb 
RO (too), before adjectives and participles are as 
follows: b to v or to w, when second letter; c to ch; 
çh to h; d to gh; g to gh, with a few exceptions to y; 
j to y; k to ch; m to v; p to ph; qu to wh; s and sh to 
h; t to h.  
116. The changes caused by the auxiliary verb 
ER (hath, has, have, or having, &c.) placed bef ore 
verbs, require n to he placed before all the verbs 
beginning with vowels radically or derivatively. A, 
e, i, o, u, w, y, change to n; and the gh, when an 
aspiration of g,9 which, when initialled by n, has the 
sound of y, and which shows that it ought o r ought 
not have that letter; but the translators of the 
Scriptures have written the word GOLL (going), 
when aspirated to gh; as, ER N’GHOLL, &c.; and the 
word GIALDYN (promise); as,  ER N ’GHIALDYN, —
Heb. xi. 11; and ER N’YIALDYN, — Josh. ix. 21. The 
same may be said of GIAREY, &c. E R changes b to 
v, çh to j; d to gh; f to v, or the next letter in the 
syllable; g to gh; j to y; k to g; m to v; p to ph; qu to 
wh; s and sh to h; sl to l and t to d. 
117. The changes of the mutable consonants, by 
placing the adverb FEER (very), before adjectives, 
are as follow: b to v; c to ch; g to gh; k to ch; m to v; 
p to ph; and qu to kw.  
118. The changes the pronoun NYN causes, 
when placed before verbs and substantives , are 
as follow: Before words initialled by vowels, many  
require to borrow the last n in the pronunciation, in 
a similar case with YN. NYN changes b to m; c to g; 
çh to j; f to v; g to gh, or y, similar to the case of g 
by CHA, as shown in examples in this page; k to g; p 
to b; q to g; and t to d. 
                                                 
9 Cregeen means: before i, as gialdyn - ghialdyn - 
n’ghialdyn [ɲ-] ~ [nj-]. 
8 
 
Examples of changes in the initials of verbs throughout the alphabet, on vowels and mutables by the 
negative adverb Cha (not). 
 
119. A in verb AASE (grow), changes to  d; as, CHA DAASE, past tense. 
120.  and  n; as, CHA NAASE, present and future.  
121. E in verb EECK (pay), changes to  d; as, CHA  DEECK, past.  
122.  and  j; as, CHA JEECK, past. 
123.  and  n; as, CHA NEECK, present and future.  
124. I in verb IU (drink), changes to  d; as, CHA  DIU, past.  
125.  and  j; as, CHA JIU, past.  
126.  and  n; as, CHA NIU, present and future.  
127. O in verb OBBREE (work), changes to  d; as, CHA  DOBBREE, past.  
128.  and  n; as, CHA NOBBREE, present and future.  
129. U in verb USHTEE (water), changes to  d; as, CHA  DUSHTEE, past.  
130.  and  n; as, CHA NUSHTEE, present and future.  
131. W in verb WHAAL (sew), changes to  d; as, CHA  DWHAAL past.  
132.  and  n; as, CHA NWHAAL, present and future.  
133. Y in verb YMMYRK (bear), changes to  d; as, CHA  DYMMYRK, past.  
134.  and  n; as, CHA NYMMYRK, present and future.  
 
135. B in verb BENN (touch), changes to  v; as, CHA  VENN, past.  
136.  and no change  b; as, CHA BENN, present and future.  
137. C in verb CAS (twist), changes to  ch; as, CHA  CHAS, past.  
138.  and  g; as, CHA GAS, present and future.  
139. ÇH in verb ÇHIONN (tighten) changes to  h; as, CHA  HIONN, past.  
140.  and  j; as, CHA JIONN, present and future. 
141. D in verb DOLL (blot), changes to  gh; as, CHA  GHOLL, past.  
142.  and no change  d; as, CHA DOLL, present and future.  
143. F in verb FOSHIL (open), changes to  d; as, CHA  DOSHIL, past.  
144.  and in sacred subjects, changes to  v; as, CHA VOSHIL, present and future.  
145.  and in colloquial, changes to  n; as, CHA NOSHIL, present and future.  
146. G in verb GIALL (promise), changes to  gh; as, CHA  GHIALL, past. 
147. or y; as, CHA YIALL, past 
148. and no change,  g; as, CHA GIALL, present and future. 
149.*H in verb HOOAR (got), changes to  d; as, CHA  DOOAR, past.  
150.  and in HIG (will come), changes to  j; as, CHA JIG, present and future.  
151. J in verb JIOLE (suck), changes to  y; as, CHA  YIOLE, past.  
152.  and no change,  j; as, CHA JIOLE, present and future.  
153. K In verb KION (buy), changes to  ch; as, CHA  CHION, past.  
154.  and  g; as, CHA GION, present and future.  
155. M in verb MOYLL (praise), changes to  v; as, CHA  VOYLL, past.  
156.  and no change,  m; as, CHA MOYLL, present and future.  
157. P in verb PROW (prove), changes to  ph; as, CHA  PHROW, past.  
158.  and  b; as, CHA BROW, present and future.  
159. QU in verb QUAALT (meet) changes to  wh; as, CHA  WHAALT, past.  
160.  and  gu; as, CHA GUAALT, present and future.  
161. S in verb SAILL (rather or wish), changes to  b; as, CHA  BAILL, <future> [past].  
162.  and  n; as, CHA NAILL, present.  
163.  in verb SAUE (save), changes to  h; as, CHA  HAUE, past.  
164.  and no change,  s; as, CHA SAUE, present and future.  
165. SH in verb SHIONE (know), changes to b; as, CHA  BIONE, past.  
166.  and  n; as, CHA NHIONE, present and future.  
167. SL in verb SLIACK (like), changes to  b; as, CHA  BLIACK, past.  
168.  and  l as, CHA LIACK, present and future.  
169. T in verb TROG (lift), changes to  h; as, CHA  HROG, past.  
170.  and  d as, CHA DROG, present and future. 
* Those in H are irregular verbs, there being no Radicals under that letter.  
9 
 
Examples of the different words produced from Manks verbs, and the changes they undergo throughout the 
alphabet; the letters l, n, r, h, q, and v, excepted. 
 
Of E and Y, (which may serve for all the vowels) 
agreeably to Remarks 14, 46, 133, and 134 
Of C and K, agreeably to Remarks 43, and 51. 
eeck, v. pay  
eeckagh 
eeckee 
eeckeyder 
eeckeyderyn 
eeckin 
eeckins 
eeckit 
eeckym  
eeckyms  
eeckyn  
eeckys  
deeck or jeeck  
geeck  
heeck  
heeckyn  
neeck  
neeckagh  
neeckin  
neeckins  
neeckym  
neeckyms  
 
ymmyrk, v. bear  
ymmyrkagh  
ymmyrkee  
ymmyrkey  
ymmyrkeyder  
ymmyrkeyderyn  
ymmyrkin  
ymmyrkins  
ymmyrkit  
ymmyrkym  
ymmyrkyms  
ymmyrkys  
dymmyrk  
gymmyrkey  
hymmyrkey  
nymmyrk  
nymmyrkagh  
nymmyrkey  
nymmyrkin  
nymmyrkins  
nymmyrkym  
nymmyrkyms  
 
cront, v. knot  
crontal  
crontagh  
crontee  
crontey  
cronteyder  
cronteyderyn  
crontin  
crontins  
crontit  
crontym  
crontyms  
crontys  
cruint, ir.  
chront  
chrontagh  
chrontal  
chrontee  
chrontey  
chronteyder  
chrontin  
chrontins  
chrontit  
chrontym  
chrontyms  
chrontys  
gront  
grontagh  
grontal  
grontee  
gronteyder  
gronteyderyn  
grontin  
grontins  
grontym  
grontyms 
keil, v. conceal  
keillagh  
keillee  
keilleyder  
keilleyderyn  
keillin  
kelllins  
keillit  
keillym  
keillyms  
keillys  
keiltyn  
cheil  
cheillagh  
cheillee  
cheilleyder  
cheilleyderyn  
cheillin  
cheillins  
cheillit  
cheillym  
cheillyms  
cheillys  
cheiltyn  
geil  
geillagh  
geillee  
geilleyder  
geilleydelyn  
geillin  
geillins  
geillym  
geillyms 
Of B and M, agreeably to Remark 41. 
 
bochill, v. herd  
bochillagh  
bochlllaght  
bochillee  
bochilley  
bochillin  
bochillins  
bochillit  
bochillym  
bochillyms  
bochillyn  
bochillys  
mochillaght  
mochilley  
mochillyn  
vochill  
vochillagh  
vochillaght  
vochilley  
vochillin  
vochillins  
vochillit 
vochillym  
vochillyms  
vochillyn  
vochillys  
moogh, v. quench  
mooghagh  
mooghaghyn  
mooghee  
mooghey  
moogheyder  
moogheyderyn  
mooghin  
mooghins 
mooghit  
mooghym  
mooghyms  
mooghys  
voogh  
vooghagh  
vooghaghyn  
vooghee  
vooghey  
voogheyder  
voogheyderyn  
voogin  
vooghins  
vooghit  
vooghym  
vooghyms  
vooghys 
 
 
10 
 
Of D and G, agreeably to Remarks 45 and 49. 
 
doll, v. blot gear, v. laugh 
dollagh gearagh 
dollee gearaghtee 
dolley gearee 
dolleyder gearey 
dolleyderyn geareyder 
dollin geareyderyn 
dollins gearin 
dollit gearins 
dollym gearit 
dollyms gearym 
dollys gearyms 
gholl gearys 
ghollagh ghear 
ghollee ghearagh 
gholley ghearaghtee 
gholleyder ghearee 
gholleyderyn ghearey 
ghollin gheareyder 
ghollins gheareyderyn 
ghollit ghearin 
ghollym ghearins 
ghollyms ghearit 
ghollys ghearym 
 ghearyms 
 ghearys 
 
Of ÇH and F, agreeably to Remarks 44 and 48. 
 
çhyrm. v. dry faag, v. leave 
çhyrmagh faagagh 
çhyrmaghey faagail 
çhyrmaghyn faagee 
çhyrmee faageyder 
çhyrmey faageyderyn 
çhyrmeyder faagin 
çhyrmeyderyn faagins 
çhyrmid faagit 
çhyrmin faagym 
çhyrmins faagyms 
çhyrmlt faagys 
çhyrmym aag 
çhyrmyms aagagh 
çhyrmys aagail 
hyrm aagee 
hyrmagh aageyder 
hyrmaghey aageyderyn 
hyrmaghyn aagin 
hyrmee aagins 
hyrmey aagit 
hyrmeyder aagym 
hyrmeyderyn aagyms 
hyrmid aagys 
hyrmin daag 
hyrmins naag 
hyrmit naagagh 
hyrmym naagail 
hyrmyms naagee 
hyrmys naagin 
jyrm naagins 
jyrmagh naagym 
jyrmaghey naagyms 
jyrmaghyn vaag 
jyrmee vaagagh 
jyrmid vaagail 
jyrmin vaagin 
jyrmins vaagins 
jyrmym vaagym 
jyrmyms vaagyms 
 
Of J and S, agreeably to remark 50. 
 
joan,v. dust saue v. save 
joanagh sauagh 
joanee sauail 
joaney sauailtagh 
joaneyder sauee 
joaneyderyn saueyder 
joanin saueyderyn 
joanins sauin 
joanit sauins 
joanym sauit 
joanyms sauym 
joanys sauyms 
yoan sauys 
yoanagh haue 
yoanee hauagh 
yoaney hauail 
yoaneyder hauailtagh 
yoaneyderyn hauee 
yoanin haueyder 
yoanins haueyderyn 
yoanit hauin 
yoanym hauins 
yoanyms hauit 
yoanys hauym 
 hauyms 
 hauys 
 
Of P and T, agreeably to Remarks 53 and 59. 
 
poose, v. marry toig, v. understand 
poosagh toiggagh 
poosaghyn toiggal 
poosee toiggalagh 
poosey toiggaltagh 
pooseyder toiggaltys 
pooseyderyn toiggee 
poosin toiggeyder 
poosins toiggin 
poost toiggim 
poosym toiggit 
poosyms toiggym 
poosys toiggyms 
phoose toiggys 
phoosagh hoig 
phoosaghyn hoiggagh 
phoosee hoiggal 
11 
 
phoosey hoiggaltagh 
phooseyder hoiggaltys 
phooseyderyn hoiggin 
phoosin hoiggins 
phoosins hoiggit 
phoost hoiggym 
phoosym hoiggyms 
phoosyms hoiggys 
phoosys doig 
boose doiggagh 
boosagh doiggal 
boosaghyn doiggaltys 
boosey doiggin 
boosin doiggins 
boosins doiggym 
boost doiggyms 
boosym  
boosyms  
 
Of SH and SL.* 
 
sheid, v. blow slug, v. swallow  
sheidagh sluggagh  
sheidee sluggag  
sheidey sluggee  
sheideydcr sluggey  
sheideyderyn sluggeyder  
sheidin sluggeyderyn  
sheidins sluggin  
sheldit sluggins  
sheidym sluggit  
sheldyms sluggym  
sheidyn sluggyms  
sheidys sluggyn 
heid sluggys  
heidagh lug  
heidee luggagh  
heidey luggag  
heideyder luggee  
heideyderyn luggey  
heidin luggeyder  
heidins luggeyderyn  
heidit luggin  
heidym luggins  
heidyms luggit  
heidyn luggym  
heidys luggyms  
 luggys 
 
 
 
 
In concluding my Observations and Remarks, 
I cannot but admire the construction, texture, and 
beauty of the Manks Language, and how the 
words initially change their cases, moods, tenses, 
degrees, &c. It appears like a piece of exquisite 
network, interwoven together in a masterly 
manner, and framed by the hand of a most skilful 
workmen, equal to the composition of the most 
learned, and not the produ ction of chance.— The 
depth of meaning that abounds in many of the 
words must be conspicuous to every person 
versed in the language. 
Having but few verbs, its brevity may be 
complained of by some, but this deficiency is 
amply supplied in the same manner as  when a 
like want occurs in the English. When a 
substantive or adjective has no verb belonging to 
itself, another verb is placed before the noun or 
adjective; as, DY VE  (to be); DY GHOAILL  (to 
take); DY GHEDDYN  (to get); DY CHUR  (to give, 
put, send), &c.; DY YANNOO  (to do, make, or 
perform), &c. We have no verb for MAYNREY 
(happy)—neither has the English —nor its noun, 
MAYNRYS (happiness); but we say, DY VE 
MAYNREY (to be happy), &c. That our ancestors 
(the translators of the Scriptures) were tenacious 
that no infringement should be made in this 
particular is obvious, as the Scriptures, with a 
few exceptions to their orthography, &c., are an 
invaluable work. The verb to pray occurs above 
two hundred times in the English Scriptures; yet 
the translators have no t once used that mongrel 
word, PRAYLL, or its parent, PRAYAL (see 
Remark 79 ), which, and the like, are now 
generally used without reserve. I do not, 
however, allude to the Clergy, who, to their 
credit, always say GOAILL PADJER  ; EC P ADJER ; 
JANNOO PADJER , &c. ; and when there is no 
necessity, we should not borrow from the 
English, but endeavour to keep the language as 
pure as possible. 
A. C. 
Kirk Arbory, 5th June, 1834.
 
 
 
 
 
 
* The verbs under the letter S do not change like the substantives and adjectives, as illustrated in Remarks 
55-57.
12 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS IN THE DICTIONARY 
 
A, B, C, Ch, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, 
P, Q, R, S, Sh, Sl, T, U, V, W, or Y, at the end 
of a line, shows that the word is a derivative 
or aspiration of one whose initial radically is 
A or B, &c. C, placed after ch, shows it to be 
an aspiration of a word radically without an h, 
and so for G placed after gh, P after ph, &c.  
a. Adjective.  
adv. Adverb.  
a. d. Adjective derivative:  
a. pl.  Adjective plural. 
adv. p. Adverb and pronoun.  
art. Article.  
art. pl.  Article plural.  
comp. Comparative degree.  
conj. Conjunction.  
c. p. Conjunction and pronoun.  
dim. Diminutive.  
em. Emphatically.  
f. Feminine gender.  
Gal. Galic or Gaelic.  
Heb. Hebrew, & Book of Hebrews.  
id. or idem. The same as above.  
in. Interjection  
lit. Literally.  
p. Pronominal.  
pl.  Plural.  
p. p. Preposition and Pronoun.  
pre. Preposition.  
pro. Pronoun.  
Prov. Manks Proverb.  
pt. Participle.  
s. Substantive.  
s. f. Substantive feminine.  
sing. Singular.  
s. m. Substantive masculine. 
s. m. f. Do. masculine and feminine.  
s. pl.  Substantive plural.  
sup. Superlative degree.  
syn. Synonymous.  
v. Verb.  
v. i. Verb imperative.  
<— a sign of repetition, and the reader is 
directed to read the word instead of the 
mark.>10 
* This is placed before such verbs where two 
are inserted, as, trog, the verb used alone; 
the one marked thus, trogg*, is the verb 
that is to be joined to -agh, -ee, -ey, &c.  
The figures 1, 2, 3, &c., refer to remarks in 
the Introduction, relative to the meaning 
of the termination, sound, or part of 
speech, &c
                                                 
10 In this edition these dashes have been replaced 
with the word or form in question. 
13 
A 
 
A 
aa-, an adjunct; a. second, second-hand. This 
word is used as a prefix in composition, 
and implies repeated action, as the Latin 
re-. Again, when yn is placed before it, it 
changes to nah, the ordinal of two.  
yn nah, s. f. (from aa), second, the ordinal 
of two. As this word is initialled by n 
besides the n in yn, other words initialled 
by vowels might claim the same; as, yn 
nollagh (the cattle); yn naassagh (the 
wilderness); yet, this is not the case. A  
aa-aase, s. m. second growth. 
aa-aase, v. to grow again.  
aa-chionnagh v. buying again, 
repurchasing.  
aa-chionnit, pt. rebought, bought again the 
second time.  
aa-chlashtyn, s. m. a rehearing.  
aa-chluinnit, pt. reheard.  
aa-chooinaghtyn, s. m. recollection.  
aa-chummit, pt. formed anew.  
aa-eaddagh, s. m. second-hand clothes.  
aa-gherrit or aagherrid, s. m. a shorter 
way, a shorter cut; pl. -yn.  
aa-ghiennaghtyn, s. m. regeneration.  
aa-hilley, s. m. second sight.  
aa-hroggal, v. rebuilding, lifting again.  
aa-lhieeney, s. m. second filling, laying 
eggs the second time; to replenish, to fill 
again.  
aa-oe, s. m. a great grand child.  
aa-smooinaght, s.m. second thought, 
reflection. 
aa-vaair, s. m. second crop.  
aa-vioee or aa-vioghee, v. revive, quicken, 
enliven. 
dy aa-vioghey, v. to revive, to quicken.  
aadjin, or aaitchin, s. m. gorse, furze, whins.  
aaitn, v. gorse, cover with whins; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -ey, 82; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
cha n’aaitn* or n’aaitnee, v. not gorse; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. A  
gaaitnagh or gaaitnaghey, v. 61. gorsing, 
or placing edder or fence wood on the top 
of a hedge; it is also called bearding or 
eddering. A  
dy aaitnagh or aaitnaghey, v. to cover 
with gorse, as a bearded hedge.  
er n’aaitnaghey, v. hath, &c. gorsed. A  
daaitnee, v. did gorse, gorsed. A  
aaitnit, pt. gorsed, whined; 85.  
s’aaitnit, a. how gorsed, or greatly, or well 
gorsed. 
baar-aadjin, an herb of the heath class. 
grein-aadjyn, s. pl. greaves. 
koinney-aadjin, s. gorse ling. 
aae, s. f. an arch, a boundary over a river, a 
ford, a place to pass over a river dry; pl. 
-ghyn.  
aaghyn, s. pl. arches, fords; Jud. xii. 6: 
Eisht ghow ad, as varr ad eh ec aaghyn 
Yordan; as huitt ec y traa shen jeh ny 
Ephraimiteyn, daa housane as da-eed. Then 
they took him, and slew him at the passages of 
Jordan: and there fell at that time of the 
Ephraimites forty and two thousand. 
aaght, s. m. a lodging; pl. -yn. 
aaght, v. lodge. 
aaghtit, pt. lodged; 85.  
e haaght, s. her lodging. A  
aailagh, or aalagh, s. f. a brood of young, 
what a fowl has at a hatching; Jer. xvii. 11: 
Myr ta’n kiark-rhennee soie er oohyn as nagh 
vel ee guirr aalagh; myr shen eshyn ta cosney 
berchys, as cha nee dy cairagh, faagee eh ad 
ayns mean e laghyn, as ec y jerrey bee eh ny 
ommydan. As the partridge sitteth on eggs, and 
hatcheth them not; so he that getteth riches, 
and not by right, shall leave them in the midst 
of his days, and at his end shall be a fool; pl. 
71 [change -agh to -ee], or -yn.  
aailagh 
gaailagh, s. f. the brood of young that a 
fowl has at hatching. A  
aail, a. d. of a brood or litter; as, guiy aail 
(a brood goose).  
aajey or aahley, s. m. a known place, a place 
used of, or convenient to. The latter word is 
used at the North of the Island for a place 
marked at sea to fish on; pl. 67 [change -ey 
to -aghyn].  
ahley, s. f. See aajey; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. [cf. lheih] 
14 
A 
 
aalican, s. m. a halcyon, a fine calm time, 
serene and tranquil weather, peace and 
tranquillity.  
aalin, a. elegant, beautiful, grand, splendid, 
noble, comely, fair, amiable, handsome, 
fine.  
s’aalin, a. how beautiful, elegant, fair, 
comely, handsome, grand, noble, amiable, 
&c. A 
s’aaley, a. id., comparative and superlative. 
A 
neu-aalin, a. inelegant, uncomely. 
aalid, s. m. elegance, beauty, grandeur, 
splendour, comeliness, fairness, 
handsomeness, nobleness, amiableness.  
e haalid, s. her beauty or comeliness. A  
aall, s. m. a fork, a flesh fork; pl. -yn.  
e haal, s. her fork. A  
aane, s. f. a liver; pl. -yn.  
e haane, s. her liver; pl. -yn. A  
aanrit, s. m. cloth, linen cloth. pl. -yn. 
e haanrit, s. her linen cloth. A  
aanrit breck, check or chequer. 
aanrit sack, sackcloth. 
aanrit caitnagh, fustian.  
aarey, s. f. a kidney; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
aarey, s. f. a ladder; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
aarl or aarlee, v. cook; dress meat; -agh, 77; 
-aghey, 82; -ee, 79; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 
86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
daarl or daarlee, v. did cook or dress 
victuals. A  
cha n’aarl or n’aarlee, v. not cook or dress 
meat; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. A  
aarlagh(ey) 
gaarlagh or gaarlaghey, v. 61. cooking. A  
 er n’aarlaghey, v. hath, &c. cooked 
victuals. A  
 e haarlagh, s. her cooking. A  
 aarlee, a. d. of cooking or dressing meat.  
aarlider, s. m. a dresser of victuals, a cook; 
see also coagyrey.  
aarlit, [pt.] 85. dressed, cooked, prepared.  
s’aarlit, a. how dressed, cooked, or made 
ready. A 
aarloo, a. ready prepared, fitted, dressed, at 
hand; apt, prone.  
s’aarloo, a. how ready, prone, apt, &c., 
comparative and superlative. A 
aarlooid 
e vee-aarlooid, s. his unpreparedness or 
unreadiness. M 
aart-ny-paart, lot nor part.  
aase, s. m. growth; pl. -yn. 
aase, v. grow; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86 -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha n’aas* or n’aase, v. not grow; -agh; 
-ee; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. A 
er n’aase, v. hath, &c. grown. A  
daase, v. did grow, grew. A 
gaase, v. 61. growing. A  
e haase, s. her growth. A  
aasit, [pt.] grown, 85.  
s’aasit, a. how grown or greatly grown. A 
aasoil, a. having the quality of growing.  
aa-aase, s. m. second growth. 
aa-aase, v. to grow again. 
aash, s. m. ease, rest, freedom from labour or 
pain, leisure; Prov. “Caghlaa obbyr aash.” 
[Change of work is rest.] 
e haash, s. her ease or rest. A  
as-dty-aash or as-aash, in. with ease, not 
quick, slowly. 
neu-aash, s. f. uneasiness, discontent. 
graue-aash, s. f. uneasiness, restlessness. 
aashagh, a. easy, not difficult.  
dy aashagh, adv. easily.  
oayll[-]aashagh, a. easy disposed, not 
violent. 
s’aashagh, a. how easy, how much at rest 
or quietness. A 
b[’]aashiagh-enn, adv. easy to know or 
well known.  
s’aashagh<t> or sassey, a. id., comp. and 
sup. A 
sassey, a. more or most easy or cheap, the 
com. and sup. of aashagh. 
aashag, s. f. a boss, a seat to rest on, a seat 
made of matted straw; pl. -yn.  
Aaue, s. f. Eve.  
abane, s. f. ankle; pl. -yn.  
e habane, s. her ankle. A  
abanagh, a. d. of the ankle or ankles.  
abb, a. abbey; as, thalloo abb.  
15 
A 
 
abbyrlhit, s. m. the alphabet.  
aber, s. m. pasture, a place to feed or graze 
on, pasturage; pl. -yn.  
abyl, a. able.  
s’abyl, a. how able or greatly able. A 
neu-abyl, a. unable, impossible. 
accan, s. m. moan, lamentation or sorrow 
expressed by a mournful tone of voice; pl. 
-yn.  
e haccan, s. her moan. A  
gaccan, v. 61. moaning, bewailing. A  
accanagh, s. m. a moaner or bemoaner; pl. 
71 [change -agh to -ee].  
accyrys, s. m. hunger, the pain felt by fasting 
long; any violent desire.  
e haccyrys, s. her hunger. A  
gaccrys, a. hungry. A  
accryssagh, a. hungry, being hungered; s. 
m. a hungry person; pl. 71 [change -agh to 
-ee].  
s’accryssagh, a. how hungry, &c. A 
s’accryssee, a. id., comp. and sup. A 
achlish or aghlish, s. f. the armpit; a quantity 
of any thing brought under the arm; Jer. 
xxxviii. 12: Cur nish ny shenn chloodyn 
ceaut, as ny frytlaggyn loau shoh fo dty 
achlishyn, fo ny coyrdyn. Put now these old 
cast clouts and rotten rags under thine 
armholes under the cords; pl. -yn. 
oghlish. See achlish.  
grine-achlish, s. m. a small grain of oats 
that grows with another. 
acoyrts, s. m. an action at law; pl. -yn.  
acoyrtssagh, s. m. a complainant; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
ad, pro. they, them; -syn; id. em.  
adhene, pro. themselves.  
adshen, pro. those, they.  
adshid, pro. those more remote.  
adshoh, pro. these.  
adultrinagh, a. adulterous.  
aeg, a. young, juvenile, youthful.  
aegey, a. pl. young, youthful; as, mraane 
aegey (young women).  
s’aeg, a. how young or youthful. A  
saa, a. younger, youngest; the comp. and 
sup. of aeg, positive, and s’aeg which is the 
degree —there is not one word in English 
which gives its definition; its meaning is, 
how young, or young is the person? and so 
for all the adjectives and participles, as 
shown in Remark 58. 
aegid, s. m. youth; 89.  
e haegid, s. her youth. A  
ben-aeg, s. f. a young woman. 
dooinney-aeg, s. m. a young man. 
aer, s. f. air, firmament.  
agg or aggad, s. m. a sore or deep cut, a nick 
or cut in a tally.  
aggair or aggairys, s. m. wrong, injustice; an 
action contrary to moral rectitude; 
aggression.  
aggairagh, a. unjust, improper, unfit, 
unsuitable; s. m. a person that commits 
injustice; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]; Pro. 
xxi. 15: Te boggey da dooinney cairal dy 
choyrt briwnys kiart: agh hig toyrt-mow er ny 
aggairee. It is joy to the just to do judgment: 
but destruction shall be to the workers of 
iniquity.  
s’aggairagh, a. how unjust, how wrong. A 
s’aggairee, a. id. comp. and sup. A 
aggindagh, a. desirous, eager to obtain.  
aggindys, s. m. fondness, eagerness, eager 
desire.  
e haggindys, s. her willingness. A  
neu-aggindagh, or neu-agginagh, a. 
undesirable, unminded for, averse. 
aggle, s. m. fear, dread, terror, a painful ap-
prehension of danger; Prov. “Boayl nagh 
vel aggle cha vel grayse” [Where there’s 
no fear, there’s no grace]; pl. -yn.  
e haggle, s. her fear. A  
er-aggle, adv. for fear, lest. Er is 
sometimes translated, for, as in this word, 
though more literally it should be, on. 
s’aggle, adv. cause of fear. This word is 
used in answer in the affirmative to baggle 
when there is cause of fear. A 
aggl* or agglee, v. fear or frighten; -agh, 
77; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88.  
cha n’aggl[*] or n’aggle, v. not fear or 
frighten; -agh; -ee; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 
94. A  
16 
A 
 
daggle or dagglee, v. did frighten or 
frightened, did terrify or terrified, &c. A  
jaggle or jagglee, v. did fright or frighten.  
gagglagh or gagglaghey, v. frightening. A  
 dy agglaghey, v. to frighten, to appal, to 
intimidate.  
 er n’agglaghey, v. hath, &c. frightened. A  
agglit, frightened, dismayed, appalled; 85.  
s’agglit, a. how frightened. A 
agglagh, a. fearful, awful, dreadful, 
frightful, afraid.  
 s’agglagh, a. how fearful, afraid. A 
 s’agglee, a. id., comp. and sup. A 
 agglaghin, s. m. a fearful person; pl. -yn.  
agglish, s. f. the Church, or body of believers; 
pl. -yn.  
ny hagglish, s. of the Church or body of 
believers. A  
agglishagh, a. ecclesiastical; a. d. of the 
Church.  
briw-agglish, s. m. an ecclesiastical judge, 
or a vicar-general. 
leigh ny hagglish, s. f. canon law. 
meoir-agglish, s. m. a beadle. 
aggyrts 
gaggyrts, v. complaining, craving, 
claiming. A  
gagyrtssagh, s. m. a complainant; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. A  
agh, conj. but.  
agh-fuirree ort, in. but stay thou, but hold 
thou.  
agh son shoh as ooilley, adv. but, notwith-
standing; 2 Sam. xxiv. 4: Agh son shoh as 
ooilley, ghow goan y ree raad noi Joab… 
Notwithstanding the king’s word prevailed 
against Joab…  
-agh, when used as a postfix in composition, 
means -ing, -ly, -ous, &c.  
aghaue, s. f. a species of hemlock, or fool’s 
parsley. In Amos vi. 12, and Hos. x. 4, it is 
rendered hemlock. …son ta shiu er hyndaa 
briwnys gys gall, as mess ny cairys gys yn 
aghaue. …for ye have turned judgment into 
gall, and the fruit of righteousness into 
hemlock.  
T’ad er loayrt goan oaiagh ayns jannoo 
conaant: myr shen ta briwnys gaase seose, 
myr yn aghaue ayns imraghyn y vagheragh. 
They have spoken words, swearing falsely in 
making a covenant: thus judgment springeth up 
as hemlock in the furrows of the field. 
Prov. “Ta’n aghaue veg shuyr da’n aghaue 
vooar” as much as to say, “a small evil or 
sin is sister to a great one.” [The little 
hemlock is a sister to the big hemlock.] 
aghin, s. f. a petition, a supplication, an en-
treaty; pl. -yn.  
e haghin, s. her petition. A  
aghinagh, s. m. a petitioner, supplicant; pl. 
71 [change -agh to -ee].  
aghiney, v. petitioning, supplicating.  
agh-markiagh, s. m. a riding horse.  
yn niagh [i.e. yn eagh], s. m. the nag, the 
riding horse.  
eagh[-]cheoy, s. f. sciatic, rheumatism.  
agheree, v. horsing.  
agherey-hoaney or agherey-amman, s. f. 
a crupper.  
aght, s. m. art, skill, behaviour, demeanor, 
gait, plight, way; pl. -yn.  
e haght, s. her skill, &c. A  
gaght, v. act, behave; -agh; -ee; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. A  
gaghtey, v. acting, behaving. A  
aghtal, a. artful, skilful, dexterous, expert, 
mannerly.  
s’aghtal, a. how skilful, artful, &c. A  
s’aghtaley, a. id., comp. and sup. A 
neu-aghtal, a. unskilful, awkward. 
aghtallys, s. m. artfulness, skilfulness.  
aght[-]baghee, s. m. manner of life, 
occupation; 2 Tim. iii. 10: Agh t’ou uss dy 
slane er hoiggal my ynsagh, my aght-baghee, 
my chiarail my chredjue, my hurranse-foddey, 
my ghraih, my veenid. But thou hast fully 
known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, 
faith, longsuffering, charity, patience; Jonah i. 
8: Insh dooin, ta shin guee ort, quoi by-
chyndagh tafn olk shoh er jeet orrin: cre ta dty 
aght beaghee? Tell us, we pray thee, for 
whose cause this evil is upon us; What is thine 
occupation?  
aghterbee, adv. any way, any wise, any 
how, however.  
naght, s. m. the way; with myr, like as, that 
as; a contraction of yn and aght. 
17 
A 
 
aghtys 
drogh-aghtys, s. f. ill behaviour, 
misdemeanor. 
aghtrhoeid, s. m. the diarrhoea or lax.  
ah, in. O! Oh!  
ahjooigh, s. f. the gullet or throat, the passage 
through which the food passes from the 
mouth to the stomach.  
ahlah, in. do not trouble me.  
ahlea, s. f. the spleen of an animal.  
ahlley, s. f. the aisle of a church.  
aiee, s. f. a kiln; pl. -yn.  
e haïee, s. her kiln. A  
aae, a. d. of a kiln 
aaie gheayil, s. [i.e. aaie/aiee eayil ‘lime 
kiln’].  
aigh-vie or aie-vie, s. m. good luck, farewell, 
good will, Psal. xlv. 5. Aigh mie dy row lhiat 
lesh dty ooashley. Good luck have thou with 
thine honour; go and prosper, 1 Chron. xxii. 
11: Nish my vac, yn Chiarn dy row mayrt; as 
gow er dty hoshiaght lesh aigh mie… Now, my 
son, the Lord be with thee; and prosper thou…  
aigney, s. f. mind, inclination, will; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn].  
e haigney, s. her mind, &c.; Luke, ii. 19: 
Agh hasht Moirrey ooilley ny raaghyn shoh 
(ayns e haigney) as smooinee ee orroo dy 
dowin ayns e cree. But Mary kept all these 
things, and pondered them in her heart. A  
aigney-caghlaait, converted; 85. 
aigney-mie, s. m. good will.  
aigney-booiagh, s. m. contentment.  
aigney-seyr, s. m. free will. 
aignagh, a. ready minded for, inclined for.  
ard-aignagh, a. arrogant, high minded. 
mooar[-]aignagh, a. magnanimous. 
lhieeney-aigney, s. m. satisfaction. 
rouailtys-aigney, s. m. the roving or 
wandering of the mind. 
sou-aigney, (sie or seiy-aigney), s. f. 
bitterness; 1 Sam. xviii. 8 [? — xxii. 2: As 
ren dy chooilley ghooinney va tranlaasit, ny fo 
feeaghyn, ny sou-aigney, ad-hene y haglym 
huggey. And every one that was in distress, 
and every one that was in debt, and every one 
that was discontented, gathered themselves 
unto him]; grief of mind, sorrow of spirit: 
Lam. iii. 65: Ver oo daue sou-aigney, hig dty 
vollaght orroo. Give them sorrow of heart, thy 
curse unto them. 
aile, s. m. fire, ignis; pl. -yn.  
e haile, s. her fire. A  
ailey, a. d. of fire; a. pl. [sic] fire; Isa. lxvi. 
15: Son cur-my-ner, hig y Chiarn lesh aile, as 
lesh e ainee myr geay-chassee, dy 
chooilleeney e yymmoose lesh eulys, as e 
oghsan lesh lossaghyn ailey. For, behold, the 
Lord will come with fire, and with his chariots 
like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, 
and his rebuke with flames of fire.  
aileagh or ailagh, a. fiery, igneous.  
s’aileagh, a. how fiery. A 
s’ailee, a. id., comparative and superlative. 
A 
glass-aileagh, s. m. a firelock. 
lus yn aile, s. f. burnet. 
aill 
saillyn, p. I please; -s, id. em.  
cha naill or naillee, v. not wish; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms, 94. S 
my saillish or sallish, p. if he please; -in, 
id. em.  
my saillee, p. if she please; -ish, id. em. 
my saillin, p. if we please; -yn, id. em. 
my sailt, p. if thou please, if it please thee.  
my silliu, p. p. if you please; -ish, id. em. 
cha naillish, p. he wishes not, or his will is 
not for; -in, id. em.  
cha nailllhien, p. we would not wish, &c. S  
cha nailliu. See nilliu. S  
nailt, p. wouldst thou wish or be pleased to 
be so? -s, id. em. S  
nilliu, p. will ye or you be pleased; -ish, id. 
em. S  
baill, v. would wish, or rather be, pleased, 
or willing.  
baillish, he would, &c.  
baillishin, he, &c.; id. em.  
baillee, she would, &c.  
bailleeish, she would or will, &., id. em.  
bailleu, they would, &c., be  
bailleuish, they would or will be, &c., id. 
em  
baillym, I would, &c.  
baillyms, I would; id. em. 161. 
18 
A 
 
baillmayd, we would wish, or rather, be 
pleased or willing  
baillhien, we, &c.  
baillhienyn, we, &c.; id. em.  
bailt, v. thou wouldst be pleased, wish, or 
be willing of; -s, id. em.  
bailliu, you or ye would, &c.  
bailloo. See bailliu.  
bailliuish, you or ye; id. em. 
my billiu, v. if you please or choose.  
my billiuish, v. if you please, &c., em.  
ainjys, s. m. acquaintance, intimacy.  
e hainjys, s. her acquaintance. A  
ainjyssagh, s. m. an acquaintance; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]; a. acquainted, 
intimate.  
s’ain[j]yssagh, a. how acquainted. A 
s’ain[j]yssee, a. id. em., comp. and sup. A 
neu-ainjyssagh, a. unacquainted. 
ainle, s. m. an angel; pl. -yn.  
e hainle, s. her angel; pl. 69. A  
ny hainleyn, s. the angels. A  
ard-ainle, s. m. archangel; pl. -yn. 
airdeylagh, s. m. a mariner’s compass.  
airh, s. f. gold. Airh wuigh as palçhey j’ee. 
[Yellow gold and plenty of it.] 
e hairh, s. her gold. A  
airhey, a. d. golden, of gold.  
airh-hallooin, s. m. yarrow, millfoil.  
airhit, gilded; 85.  
moddey airh, s. m. a mock sun. 
earroo-airhey, s. m. the golden number. 
aitt, a. odd, antic, queer, comical, funny, 
ridiculous, sportive, &c.  
s’aaitt or saitt, a. how antic, odd, funny, 
comical, or ridiculous. A 
s’aitt. See saaïtt.  
s’aaittey, a. id., comp. and sup. A 
aittys, s. f. anticness, fun, &c.  
e haittys, s. her, &c. See aittys. A  
aker, s. f. an anchor; pl. –yn. Acts, xxvii. 29: 
Eisht er-aggle dy roieagh ad er creggyn, hilg ad 
kiare akeryn magh veih yn jerrey, dy jeean 
jeeaghyn son y laa. Then fearing lest we should 
have fallen upon rocks, they cast four anchors 
out of the stern, and wished for the day. 
aker, v. -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
akerit, anchored; 85.  
-al. See 79.  
Albin, s. m. Scotland, Albion.  
Nalbin or Nolbin, s. Scotland, Caledonia. 
Some say that this word is from N’alpin, on 
account of the great Alpine mountains 
therein, and others that it is from Albion.  
Albinagh, s. m. a Scotchman; a. Scotch; pl. 
71 [change -agh to -ee].  
sy n’Albinagh, s. in the Scotchman. A  
aless, in. alas.  
Alister, s. m. Alexander.  
almoragh, s. m. an ignoramus; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee].  
almoragh<t>, a. ignorant, inadvertent, 
unlearned, stupid.  
s’almoragh, a. how ignorant A 
s’almoree, a. id., comp. and sup. A 
almorys, s. m. ignorance.  
e holmorys, s. her ignorance. O (sic) 
alt, s. f. a high place, altitude.  
altar, s. m. an altar; pl. -yn.  
am, a. bad, vile.  
amglass or amvlass, s. m. a drink made by 
mixing milk and water together, pale 
watery drink, or bad tasted drink, acid 
water.  
amm, s. m. stature, size, puberty.  
ammyr, s. f. a canal, or channel of water; pl. 
-yn.  
ammys, s. m. obeisance; 1 Kings, i. 16: As 
chroym Bath-sheba sheese ayns ammys da’n 
ree. And Bathsheba bowed, and did obeisance 
unto the king; homage, reverence, 
dutifulness.  
e hammys, s. her obeisance. A  
ammyssagh, a. obeisant, submissive, 
dutiful; s. duteous person; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee].  
s’ammyssagh, a. how dutiful, submissive, 
or obedient. A  
s’ammyssee, a. id., comp. and sup. A 
ammyssit, pt. worshipped, having 
obeisance paid to; 85.  
mee[-]ammys, s. m. disrespect, irreverence. 
19 
A 
 
neu-ammyssagh, a. undutiful<ness>; s. m. 
an undutiful person; pl. 71 [change -agh to 
-ee]. 
amylt, v. swim; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
gamylt, v. swimming, and perhaps a better 
word than snaue, which we make use of. A  
amyltagh, s. m. a swimmer; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee].  
-an, s. as a termination to words, shows 
diminution.  
an-, when used as a prefix in composition, 
signifies un-, (English).  
anchasherick, a. unholy, unsanctified, 
profane, wicked, impious.  
 s’anchasherick, a. how unholy, 
unsanctified or profane. A  
 s’anchasherickey a. id., comp. and sup. A 
 anchasherickys, s. unholiness, impiety, 
profaneness, wickedness.  
anchasley, a. unlike, different.  
 s’anchasley, a. how different, how unlike; 
comp. and sup. A 
 anchaslys, s. m. difference; pl. -yn.  
anchassanagh, a. trackless.  
anchiart, a. uneven, unequal.  
 s’anchiart, a. how uneven. A 
 s’anchiartey, a. id., comp. and sup. A 
anchoodee, v. uncover, disclose.  
 dy anchoodaghey, v. to uncover, to 
develop.  
anchooie, a. unfit, unqualified.  
anchredjuagh, s. m. an unbeliever; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
anchreestee, s. m. a heathen, infidel, 
pagan.  
 anchreestiagh, s. m. heathenism, 
infidelity.  
andrailagh 
Quaiyl Andrailagh, a. See Quaiyl 
Ardreiltagh. 
anfirrinnys, s. m. untruth; pl. -yn.  
angaaish, s. m. anguish, pain; pl. -yn.  
 angaaishagh, a. painful, afflicted, 
tortured with anguish; s. m. a person 
afflicted with pain; pl. 71 [change -agh to 
-ee].  
 s’angaaishagh, a. how much in anguish. 
A 
 s’angaaishee, a. id., comp. and sup. A 
 angaaishit, afflicted, pained; 85.  
 s’angaaishit, a. how anguished. A 
anghennal, a. cheerless, sad.  
 anghennallys, s. m. infestivity.  
anghiarey-çhymmylt, s. m. 
uncircumcision.  
 anghiarit, uncut, unhewn; 85.  
anghoo, s. m. ill fame, infamy, disgrace.  
 anghooagh, a. infamous, disgraceful.  
anjee, s. m. an atheist.  
 anjeeagh, a. atheistical.  
anjeeragh, a. not straight. Notwithstanding 
the etymology given under the word 
oainjyr, I hesitate not to say that oainjyragh 
came from this.  
anlaadit, unloaded; disburdened; 85.  
anleigh, s. m. partiality in law.  
 anleighagh, a. contrary to law.  
anlheil or anlheiltys, s. m. unable to move 
about, imbecility, helplessness.  
 anlheiltagh, s. m. a person unable to 
move or help himself; pl. 71 [change -agh 
to -ee].  
anlout, v. unloft; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -ey, 82; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
anlught, v. unload; -it. 85; unladen.  
annoon (sic: stress), a. weak, feeble, 
imbecile.  
 s’annoon, a. how weak or feeble. A 
 s’annooney, a. id., comp. and sup. A 
 gannooinagh or gannooinaghey, v. 
weakening, enfeebling; Mark, viii. 3:  
As my ver-ym ad ersooyl nyn drostey gys nyn 
dhieyn hene, nee ad gannooinaghey er y 
raad. And if I send them away fasting to their 
own houses, they will faint by the way; 
debilitate, 61.  
 dy gannooinee, [v]. that they weaken, or 
grow weak; Matt. xv. 32: …as cha der-ym 
ad ersooyl nyn drostey, er aggle dy 
gannooinee ad er y raad. …and I will not send 
them away fasting, lest they faint in the way. A  
 gannooinys, v. shall or will weaken or 
grow weak. A   
 annoonagh, s. m. a weak one; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
 annooney, s. m. weakness; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn].  
20 
A 
 
 annoonid, s. m. frailty; pl. -yn.  
 e hannoonid, s. her weakness. A  
anoayltagh (sic), a. unaccustomed. See 
also neu-.  
 s’anoayllagh, a. how unaccustomed. A 
 s’anoayllee, a. id., comp. and sup. A 
anshickyr, a. unsteady, unsure, inconstant, 
wavering. See also neuhickyr.  
anvea (sic: stress), s. m. discord, division; 
Luke, xii. 51: Vel shiu smooinaghtyn dy daink 
mish dy chur shee er y thalloo? Cha nee, ta 
mee gra riu, agh anvea. Suppose ye that I am 
come to give peace on earth? I tell you, Nay; 
but rather division; strife, perplexity, 
disquietude, uneasiness. 
 e hanvea, s. her discord or strife. A  
 anveagh, a. discordant, troublesome.  
 s’anveagh, a. how discordant, &c. A 
 s’anveaee, a. id., comp. and sup. A 
anvennick. a[dv]. seldom, not often.  
s’anvennick, s. how seldom. A 
s’anvenkey, a. id., comp. and sup. A 
anvio, a. inanimate.  
s’anvio a. how inanimate; comp. and sup. 
A 
anvroie, a. parboiled.  
Andreays, a. d. of Andrew.  
anjeal or anjeeal, s. m. breakfast, a handsel.  
anmagh, a. derived from anmoghey; late, not 
early.  
s’anmagh, a. how late. A 
s’anmee, a. id., comp. and sup. A 
anmys, s. m. lateness; Jud. xix. 9: Cur-my-
ner, te nish lesh yn astyr; ta mee guee ort 
fuirree fud-ny-hoie: t’ou fakin dy vel eh lesh yn 
anmys; gow aaght ayns shoh, dy vod dty chree 
ve gennal, as moghrey mairagh gow-jee er nyn 
yurnah, dy vod oo goll thie. Behold, now the 
day draweth toward evening, I pray you tarry all 
night: behold, the day groweth to an end, lodge 
here, that thine heart may be merry; and to 
morrow get you early on your way, that thou 
mayest go home.  
anney, s. f. (sounded ahney), commandment.  
annaghyn, s. pl. commandments.  
annym, s. m. soul; Heb. Anaph.  
e hannym, s. her soul. A  
anmeenyn, s. pl. or anmeeyn, souls.  
anmey, a. d. of the soul or souls.  
ny hanmey, a. d. of the soul. A  
bochilley-anmey, s. m. a pastor. 
noid-ny-hanmey, s. m. the enemy of souls. 
ansoor (sic: stress), s. m. answer, verdict, 
award; pl. -yn. 
ansoor, v. -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -eyder; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha n’ansoor, v. not answer or reply; -agh; 
-ee; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. A  
e hansoor, s. her answer. A  
dansoor, v. answered or replied. A  
gansoor, v. answering, replying, doing 
what is bid. A  
ansoorit, answered, solved; 85.  
appee, a. ripe, mature, mellow.  
s’appee, a. how ripe or mature; comp. & 
sup. A 
neu-appee, a. immature, unripe. 
appeeid or appeeys, s. m. ripeness.  
appaghey, v. ripening, maturing.  
ard, a. high, chief, great, loud, lofty, arch, 
tall; s. m. coast, or point of the compass, 
region, side; Job, xviii. 11: Bee aggle 
atchimagh er veih dy chooilley ard, as cur er 
goaill gys e voynyn. Terrors shall make him 
afraid on every side, and shall drive him to his 
feet.  
ardjyn, s. pl. coasts, regions.  
e hardjyn, s. her coasts. A  
sy n’ard, s. in the coast or point of the 
compass. A  
co-ard, s. as high, of the same height.  
ardey, a. pl. high; as, ynnydyn ardey (high 
places).  
s’ard, a. how high or lofty. A 
syrjey, a. higher, highest, comp. and sup. 
of ard. 
ardid or ardjid. See yrjid.  
ardys, s. m. highness; pl. -yn. 
ard-reeoil, royal highness.  
kione ardys 
e chione-ardys, s. his haughtiness; Pro. 
xxv. 27: Cha vel eh follan dy ee rouyr mill; myr 
shen cha vel eh son goo dooinney, dy ve geiyrt 
dy gyere er e chione-ardys hene. It is not good 
to eat much honey: so for men to search their 
own glory is not glory. K 
yrj or yrjee, v. make higher, exalt; -agh; 
21 
A 
 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys. A 
dy yrjaghey, v. to exalt; Isaiah, xxxiii. 5: 
Ta'n Chiarn er ny yrjaghey; son t'eh cummal 
ayns yn yrjid. The Lord is exalted; for he 
dwelleth on high. A  
yn yrjey, s. the height. A  
yn yrjid, s. the height or highness. A 
 
ard-aignagh, a. arrogant, high minded. 
ard-ainle, s. m. archangel; pl. -yn.  
ard-aspick, s. m. archbishop; pl. -yn.  
ard-ayraghyn, s. pl. principal fathers, chief 
fathers; I Chron. xxiv. 31: Hayrn ad shoh 
lottyn myrgeddin myr ren nyn mraaraghyn mec 
Aaron, fenish Ghavid y ree, as Zadok, as 
Ahimelech, as ard-gheiney ayraghyn ny 
saggyrtyn as ny Leviteyn, eer ny ard-ayraghyn 
myr ren nyn mraaraghyn saa. These likewise 
cast lots over against their brethren the sons of 
Aaron in the presence of David the king, and 
Zadok, and Ahimelech, and the chief of the 
fathers of the priests and Levites, even the 
principal fathers over against their younger 
brethren.; Neh. vii. 71: As hug paart jeh ny 
ard-ayraghyn, gys stoyr yn obbyr, feed 
thousane peesh dy airh. And some of the chief 
of the fathers gave to the treasure of the work 
twenty thousand drams of gold. 
ard-chiarail or -ys, s. f. the providence of 
God, foresight displayed in taking measures 
before hand; pl. -yn; -syn.  
ard-chione, s. m. superior.  
 ard-chioneys, s. m. superiority.  
ard-choraa, s. m. loud voice; pl. -yn.  
ard-chreeagh, a. haughty, highminded.  
 s’ard-chreeagh, a. how haughty. A 
ard-er, s. m. a chief; 1 Chron. xxvi. 10: Va 
ec Hosah, jeh cloan Merari, mec; Simri yn ard-
er, (son ga nagh row eh yn mac shinney, ny-
yeih ren e ayr eh yn ard-er). Also Hosah, of the 
children of Merari, had sons; Simri the chief, 
(for though he was not the firstborn, yet his 
father made him the chief).  
 ard-fer[-]reill, s. m. a supreme; 1 Pet. ii. 
1[3]: Jean-jee shiu hene y injillaghey gys dy 
chooilley leigh er ny oardaghey liorish deiney er 
graih yn Chiarn; edyr eh ve gys y ree, myr yn 
ard-fer-reill. Submit yourselves to every 
ordinance of man for the Lords sake: whether it 
be to the king, as supreme.  
ard-ghennallys, s. m. great gladness.  
ard-ghoo, s. m. fame; Num. xvi. 2: As hass 
ad seose noi Moses, marish shiartanse dy 
chloan Israel, daa cheead as jeih as da-eed 
prince jeh’n cheshaght, jeh ard ghoo mastey’n 
pobble, deiney ooasle. And they rose up before 
Moses, with certain of the children of Israel, two 
hundred and fifty princes of the assembly, 
famous in the congregation, men of renown.  
 ard-ghooagh, a. famous, reputable.  
ard-ghooinney, s. m. a great man.  
 ard-gheiney, s. pl. great men, men high in 
power or authority.  
ard-jaghin, s. m. an Archdeacon; pl. -yn.  
ard-laa, s. m. a high day; John, xix. 31: 
Shen-y-fa son dy nee laa yn aarlaghey ve, as 
nagh beagh ny kirp er y chrosh er laa yn 
doonaght (son va’n doonaght shen ny ard-laa) 
ghuee ny Hewnyn er Pilate, ny lurgaghyn oc dy 
ve brisht, as ad dy ve goit ersooyl. The Jews 
therefore, because it was the preparation, that 
the bodies should not remain upon the cross on 
the sabbath day, (for that sabbath day was an 
high day), besought Pilate that their legs might 
be broken, and that they might be taken away.  
ard-leeid[eil]agh, s. m. a captain; Josh. v. 
14: As dooyrt eshyn, Cha nee nyn ’oï; agh myr 
ard-leeideilagh sheshaght caggee yn Chiarn 
ta mish er jeet. And he said, Nay; but as 
captain of the host of the Lord am I now come.  
ard-loght, s. m. felony, capital offence; pl. 
-yn.  
 ard-loghtagh, s. m. a felon; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee].  
 ard-loghtal, a. felonious. 
 dy ard-loghtal, adv. feloniously. 
ard-losserey, s. m. ground-ivy, alehoof;   
 ard-losserey-firryn, the herb archangel.  
ard-marragh, s. m. an admiral; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
ard-nieu, s. m. a serpent; pl. -yn.  
 ard-nieuagh, a. very venomous.  
 bossan ardnieu, s. f. bistort, snakeweed. 
ard-obbree, s. m. an architect; pl. -yn.  
ard-ooasley, s. m. adoration; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn].  
ard-reill or ard-reiltys, s. m. principality, 
chief rule, monarchy; pl. -yn.  
 ard-reiltagh, s. m. a monarch; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
22 
A 
 
 Quaiyl-Ardreiltagh, s. m. the chancery 
court. This has no doubt been corrupted to 
what you hear Quaiyl-Andrailagh; some 
say the latter is from Quaiyl-wandrailagh 
(the wandering court), but I prefer the first. 
ard-saggyrt, s. m. high priest; pl. -yn.  
ard-soiaghey, s. m. acceptance.  
ard-stroialtagh, s. m. a great waster; Prov. 
xviii. 9: Eshyn neesht ta liastey ayns e obbyr 
eeh ny vraar da’n ard stroialtagh. He also that 
is slothful in his work is brother to him that is a 
great waster. 
ard-sym, s. m. the principal; pl. -yn.  
ard-valley, s. m. a city; pl. 70 [ard-valjyn].  
 e hard-valley, s. her city. A  
ard-vollaght, s. m. an execration; Jer. xlii. 
18: …as bee shiu son ard-vollaght, as son 
atchim, as son mollaght-mynney, as son 
oltooan, as cha vaik shiu yn ynnyd shoh arragh. 
…and ye shall be an execration, and an 
astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach; 
and ye shall see this place no more.  
ard-vooaralagh, a. imperious; Ezek. xvi. 
30: Cre cha faase ta dty chree, ta’n Chiarn Jee 
dy ghra, fakin dy vel oo cur-rish ooilley ny 
reddyn shoh, obbyr ben-streebee ard-
vooaralagh! How weak is thine heart, saith the 
Lord God, seeing thou doest all these things, 
the work of an imperious whorish woman.  
dy ard-voylley, v. to magnify, to extol.  
ard-vriw, s. m. chancellor; Ezra, iv. 17: 
Eisht hug y ree ansoor gys Rehum yn ard-
vriw… Then sent the king an answer unto 
Rehum the chancellor….  
ard-vyghin, s. m. great mercy; pl. -yn.  
ard-wannalagh, a. stiff-necked.  
ard-wooinjer, s. m. principal ones.  
arg, s. f. ark; pl. -yn.  
argane, s. m. dispute, contest, controversy.  
e hargane, s. her dispute or contest. A  
arganagh, s. m. a disputer, an arguer; a. 
disputative, cavelling, contentious.  
s’arganagh, a. how disputative, &c. A 
s’arganee, a. id., comp. and sup. A 
argane, v. 
cha n’argane, v. not argue or dispute; 
-agh; -ee; -in; -ins, 94. A  
dy arganey, v. to dispute, argue; 
questioning, Mark, ix. 14: As tra v’eh er jeet 
gys e ostyllyn honnick eh chaglym mooar dy 
leih my geayrt-y-moo, as ny scrudeyryn 
arganey roo. And when he came to his 
disciples, he saw a great multitude about them, 
and the scribes questioning with them.  
er n’arganey, v. [116]. hath, &c. argued, 
&c. A  
arganys, s. disputation, contention.  
argid, s. m. silver, money; pl. -yn.  
argidagh, a. having plenty of money.  
argid-bio, s. m. quicksilver, mercury.  
argid-laue, s. m. ready money, cash.  
argid-ruy, s. m. copper money, pence.  
bossan argid, s. m. tansy, silverweed. 
duillag argid, s. f. silver weed, tansy. 
ark, s. f. a farrow; a young pig. Gow ark jeh 
dty vuck hene. [Take the young from thy 
own pig.] 
irk, s. pl. young pigs; the pl. of ark. 
arkagh, a. d. of breeding young pigs, as a 
sow.  
ark[-]vuickey, s. f. a young pig. 
muck-arkagh 
yn vuck-arkagh, s. the sow. M 
arkan-sonney, s. a hedge hog, or a 
fabulous creature ominous of plenty; a fat 
little pig.  
arkyn, s. f. a beast’s privity.  
arkys, s. m. adversity, calamity, misfortune, 
misery, disaster, distress; pl. -syn.  
sy n’arkys, s. the adversity, calamity. A  
arkyssagh, a. calamitous, disasterous, 
distressing; s. m. a person in distressed 
circumstances; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
s’arkyssagh, a. how calamitous, disastrous, 
adverse, or irksome. A 
s’arkyssee, a. id., comp. and sup. A 
armee, s. f. army; pl. -yn.  
armyn, s. pl. arms.  
armeyder, or armyder, s. m. an armourer, 
or armour bearer; 1 Sam. xiv. 13: As ren 
Jonathan drappal seose er e laueyn as er e 
chassyn, as e armyder ny yeï as v’ad er nyn 
yiarey sheese roish Jonathan, as varr yn 
armyder geiyrt er. And Jonathan climbed up 
upon his hands and upon his feet, and his 
armourbearer after him: and they fell before 
Jonathan; and his armourbearer slew after him.  
23 
A 
 
arn, s. f. sloe; pl. -yn. See drineyn.  
drine arn (the sloe thorn). 
arnane, s. m. work done in the night by 
candle light. The Irish have this word for 
task.  
arpin, s. m. an apron; the herb orpine; pl. -yn. 
I have written this word as it is spoken.  
arr, v. offer; -ee; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -it, 85; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha n’arr* or n’arree, v. not offer; -agh; 
-in; -ins, 94. A  
garral, v. 61. offering to give, proffering. A  
dy arral, v. to offer, or press on. 
er n’arral, v. hath, &c. offered or 
proffered. A  
arrit, 85; offered; Prov. “Cha row rieau 
cooid arrit mie.” [Offered goods were 
never good.] 
arr, v. shift, remove, flit; -aghey, 82, to shift, 
&c.; -ee, remove; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -it, 85; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha n’arr* or n’arree, v. not shift; -agh; 
-in; -ins, 94. A  
darree, v. shifted or did shift, remove or 
did remove or shift, is used for darr (last). 
A 
garragh or garraghey, v. 61. shifting, 
moving out of one place to another. A  
er n’arragh or n’arraghey, pt. hath, &c. 
shifted A  
arragh, a. any more, no more.  
arragh, s. f. the spring, or vernal quarter. 
sy n’arragh, s. [in] the spring. A  
arree, a. d. of spring.  
cormid-traa-arree, s. m. the spring or 
vernal equinox. 
arran, s. m. bread; pl. -yn.  
arrane, s. m. a song, a hymn; pl. -yn.  
arraneagh, s. m. a singer; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee]; 2 Chron. xxxv. 15: As 
Chenaniah, va’n ard arraneagh jeh ny 
Leviteyn: mainshtyr-ynsee ny arraneyn-
moyllee, son v’eh schleioil. And Chenaniah, 
chief of the Levites, was for song: he instructed 
about the song, because he was skilful.  
arraneyder, s. m. a songster; pl. -yn.  
arraneys, s. m. singing.  
arrey, s. m. a watch. 
arrey-traa, a watch, a time-piece.  
arreydagh, a. watchful.  
s’arreydagh, a. how watchful. A 
s’arreydee, a. id., comp. and sup. A 
arreyder, s. m. a watchman; pl. -yn.  
arrey, s. m. Eccl. xii. 6, a cistern, a mill-race: 
Roish my vees yn coyrd argid er ny eaysley, 
ny’n saagh airh er ny vrishey, ny’n cruishtin 
brisht ec y chibbyr, ny’n whueeyl brisht ec yn 
arrey. Or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the 
golden bowl be broken, or the pitcher be 
broken at the fountain, or the wheel broken at 
the cistern. See area; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
area or arey, s. m. a mill-race, a passage 
for water to a mill.  
arrish, v. 
garrish, v. jeering, mimicking, mocking.  
er n’arrish, v. hath, &c. jeered, mimicked. 
G 
arroo, s. m. corn; pl. -yn.  
e harroo, s. her corn. A  
mwyllin arroo, s. f. a corn mill. 
arroo[-]y[-]riyr, s. f. the night before last. 
This word may be a corruption of Earroo, 
number, the night that numbered before last 
night.  
arroogh, s. f. the chimb of a barrel, or tub, 
&c. pl. -yn.  
arryltagh, a. willing, voluntary, without any 
degree of reluctance, free; Rom. v. 15, free, 
spontaneous: Agh cha nee myr ta’n loght, myr 
shen neesht ta’n gioot arryltagh. But not as the 
offence, so also is the free gift; s. m. a 
volunteer; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
s’arryltagh, a. how willing or inclined for. 
A 
s’arryltee, a. id., comp. and sup. A 
neu-arryltagh, a. unwilling, involuntary. 
arryltys, s. m. compliance, willingness, 
readiness.  
arrym, s. m. reverence, submission, honour, 
respect, obedience, solemnity.  
arrymagh, a. reverential, submissive, 
dutiful, obedient, solemn.  
arrymid, s. m. submissiveness, &c.  
arrymydagh, s. m. one that pays respect.  
24 
A 
 
s’arrymagh, a. how reverential, how much 
for giving due respect. A 
s’arrymee, a. id., comp. and sup. A 
arrymyder, s. m. one to whom respect is 
due, an esquire. 
arrys, s. m. repentance, penitence, sorrow for 
sin.  
arryssagh, a. sorrowful, sorry, penitent, 
penitential; s. m. a penitent person; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
s’arryssagh, a. sorry or sorrowful, how 
repentant or penitential. A 
s’arryssee, a. id., comp. and sup. A 
mee[-]arrys, s. m. impenitence. 
as, conj. and.  
as-haink eh gy-kione, and it came to pass, 
or to an end. 
as ad, c. p. and they, and said they, or and 
they said.  
as adsyn, c. p. and they said; em.  
as-eshyn c. p. and he said, or said he.  
asbyrt, s. f. vespers, evening prayers pl. -yn  
ash 
er-ash, adv. to appear after being hid, 
hidden or concealed; to become damp, as 
such things as have salt in them, will in 
moist weather; in Ez. xvii. 9, it means, 
prosper: Abbyr uss, Myr shoh ta’n Chiarn Jee 
dy ghra, Jig eh er-ash? Say thou, Thus saith 
the Lord God; Shall it prosper? 
ashlish s. f. a vision dream, or revelation.  
dy ashlaghey, v. to show by vision. 
ashleyder s. m. a dreamer, a person who 
sees visions, 2 Chron. xxix. 30: Marish shoh 
doardee ree Hezekiah, as ny princeyn da ny 
Leviteyn dy ghoaill arraneyn-moyllee da’n 
Chiarn, lesh goan Ghavid, as Asaph yn 
ashleyder. Moreover Hezekiah the king and 
the princes commanded the Levites to sing 
praise unto the Lord with the words of David, 
and of Asaph the seer; one who has 
something revealed to him in sleep.  
ashoon, s. f. a nation; pl. -yn.  
e hashoon, s. her nation.  
ashoonagh, s. m. a gentile, an individual of 
a nation; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]. A  
ny hashoonee, s. the nations, the people of 
nations. A 
askaid, s. f. a bile [i.e. a boil]; pl. -yn.  
asney, s. f. a rib; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
aspick, s. m. a bishop; pl. -yn.  
aspickagh, a. d. belonging to a bishop; 
episcopal.  
aspickys, s. m. bishoprick; Acts, i. 20: Son 
te scruit ayns lioar ny psalmyn, Lhig da’n 
ynnyd-vaghee echey ve follym faase, as ny lhig 
da dooinney erbee cummal ayn: as, Yn 
aspickys echey lhig da fer elley y ghoaill. For it 
is written in the book of Psalms, Let his 
habitation be desolate, and let no man dwell 
therein: and his bishoprick let another take.  
ard-aspick, s. m. archbishop; pl. -yn. 
ass, adv. out; out of him, empty, in opposition 
to ayn (in).  
assyn, adv. p. out of him, the emphatic of 
ass.  
ass-hene, adv. p. out of himself, or itself.  
ass-jee-hene, adv. p. out of herself.  
ass-doo, adv. p. out of them or those.  
ass-doo-hene, adv. p. out of themselves.  
ass-doo-syn, adv. p. out of them; em.  
assym, adv. p. out of me; -s, id. em.  
assym-pene, adv. p. out of myself. The h in 
hene changes to p after an m. 
ass-dooin, adv. p. out of us. 
ass-dooinyn, adv. p. out of us; em.  
assyd-hene, adv. p. out of thyself. 
ass-diu, p. p. out of you; -ish; id. em.  
ass-diu-hene, adv. p. out of yourselves. 
 
ass-bree, a. faint, null, void.  
as-dty-aash or as-aash, in. with ease, not 
quick, slowly. 
ass-fenish, or assenish, a. not present.  
ass-laanid, s. m. pravity, not in a perfect 
state.  
ass-laue, adv. p. without delay, quickly.  
ass-laynt, s. f. out of health, sickness, 
disease, illness, disorder; pl. -yn. 
 e has[-]slaynt, s. her illness. A  
 ass-layntagh, a. diseased, ill, sick, 
unhealthy; s. m. a diseased person; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]; Mat. iv. 24: As hie goo 
jeh magh trooid ooilley Syria: as hug ad lhieu 
huggey ooilley ny aslayntee, fo doghanyn as 
pianyn, adsyn va seaghnit lesh drogh-
25 
A 
 
spyrrydyn, sleih ass nyn geeayl, as an-lheiltee, 
as ren eh ad y lheihys. And his fame went 
throughout all Syria: and they brought unto him 
all sick people that were taken with divers 
diseases and torments, and those which were 
possessed with devils, and those which were 
lunatick, and those that had the palsy; and he 
healed them.  
ass-shilley, adv. out of sight. Prov. “Ass 
shilley ass smooinaghtyn.” [Out of sight, 
out of mind.] 
ass-tayrn, s. f. a rush candle case.  
ass-towse, adv. out of measure, 
exceedingly, beyond everything.  
ass-ymmyd, a. out of use, obsolete.  
ass-ynnyd, adv. out of place, out of joint.  
ass-y-noa, adv. anew, over again.  
assag, s. f. a weasel; pl. -yn. 
assee, s. m. hurt, harm, damage; pl. -yn.  
e hassee, s. her hurt or harm. A 
ass-tin or asstan, a. This word maybe from 
ass-fakin (out of sight); eaddagh-asstan 
would then be linings; çheu-asstan, the side 
out of sight. 
assyl, s. f. an ass; pl. -y[n].  
e hassyl, s. her ass. A  
astan, s. f. a conger, an eel; pl. -yn.  
e hastan, s. her conger or eel. A  
coar-ny-hastan, s. f. a crane; pl. -yn. 
astyr, v. destroy out of the roots; -agh, 77.  
dastyr, v. did extirpate or root out. A  
gastr or gastyr, v. 61. root out, extirpate; 
-agh; -ee; -in; -ins; -yn; -yms; -ys, 94. A  
gastral or gastyrt, v. 61. rooting out, 
extirpating. A  
dy astyrt or astyral, v. to root out or 
extirpate.  
gastyrit, 85. 61. rooted out, extirpated. A  
atçhim, s. m. dread, awe, terror, horror, fright. 
atçhimagh, a. awful, dreadful; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
s’atçhimagh, a. how awful, dreadful, 
dismal, terrible, &c. A  
s’atçhimee, a. id., comp. and sup. A 
atçhimid, s. m. awfulness, &c.  
atçhimit, 85. awed, dismayed; Jer. xvii. 
18: Lhig dauesyn ve craghit ta jannoo 
tranlaase orrym, agh ny lhig dauesyn mish y 
chraghey; lhig dauesyn ve atchimit, agh ny lhig 
dooys ve atchimit. Let them be confounded 
that persecute me, but let not me be 
confounded: let them be dismayed, but let not 
me be dismayed.  
s’atçhimit, a. how awed, how dreaded. A 
neu-atçhimit, a. unawed. 
att, s. m. a swelling an inflammation, an 
abscess; pl. -yn. 
att, v. swell, -agh; 77; -ee, 80.  
cha n’att, v. not swell; -agh; -ee; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms, 94. A  
datt, v. did swell, swelled,  
dhatt or datt, v. did swell or swelled. A  
gatt, v. 61. swelling.  
attit, 85. swelled, swollen.  
attey, s. m. a crown; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
atteeyn, s. pl. chapiters or crowns.  
skynn-attey, s. f. a dagger; Jud. iii. 16, 21: 
Agh hug Ehud lesh skynn-attey (dy ghaa foyr), 
cubit er lhiurid; as chiangle eh eh fo e eaddagh 
er e heu yesh. But Ehud made him a dagger 
which had two edges, of a cubit length; and he 
did gird it under his raiment upon his right thigh; 
As hug Ehud magh e laue chiare, as ghow eh 
yn skynn-attey veih e lheayst yesh, as roie eh 
stiagh eh ’sy volg echey. And Ehud put forth his 
left hand, and took the dagger from his right 
thigh, and thrust it into his belly.  
aundyr, s. f. a prize, something valuable.  
aunlyn, s. m. relish or moisture that is taken 
with bread, potatoes, &c. Dr. A Clarke’s 
note on John, vi. 9, is quite applicable to 
this word; opsarion, the Greek word, he 
says “signifies what is eaten with bread to 
perfect the meal, or to make it easy of 
deglutition, or to help the digestion. There 
is no word in the English language for it, 
which is a great defect. The inhabitants of 
Scotland and of the north & north west of 
Ireland use the word kytshen, [so do the 
inhabitants of this island] by which they 
express whatever is eaten with bread or 
potatoes, flesh, fish, butter, milk, eggs.”  
oanlyn or oalyn. Though the former of 
these may, perhaps, be the best 
orthography, yet see aunlyn. 
26 
A 
 
austeyr 
ben-austeyr, s. f. a nun. Perhaps the 
Nunnery near Douglas derives its name 
from this word. 
aw, (pronounced aoo), <v.> [a.] raw, not 
boiled.  
s’aw, a. how raw. A 
s’awey, a. id., comp. and sup. A 
awid, s. m. rawness; 89.  
awane, a. base immodest, unchaste, obscene.  
s’awane, a. how base, rude, or immodest. 
A 
awaneagh, s. m. rude, raw, uncivilized.  
awatta, in. ho brave! Obsolete.  
ouwatta, in. ho, brave! Obsolete.  
awin, s. f. a river; pl. -yn.  
ny hawin, a. d. of the river. A  
e hawin, s. her river. A  
awiney, a. d. of a river or rivers.  
cabbag-ny-hawin, s. f. colt’s-foot, cough-
wort, hart’s-hoof. 
muck-awin, s. f. a bear. 
awnse, s. f. an ounce; pl. -yn.  
awnssal, s. m. a steelyard; pl. -yn.  
awree, s. f. water in which anything has been 
boiled; broth; pl. -yn.  
ayn, pro. in, within, in him.  
aynsyn, p. p. in him, em.  
aynjee, p. p. in her; -ish, id. em.  
ayn-jee-hene, p. p. in herself.  
ayn-doo, p. p. in them; -syn, id. em.  
ayndaue, p. p. in those; -syn, id. em.  
ayn-ym, p. p. in me; -s, id. em.  
ayn-ym-pene, p. p. in [m]yself.  
ayn-in, p. p. in us; -yn, id. em.  
ayn-in-hene, p. p. in ourselves.  
ayn-dooin, p. p. in us; -in, id. em.  
ayn-dooin-hene, p. p. in ourselves.  
ayn-yd, p. p. in thee; -s, id. em.  
ayn-yd-hene, p. p. in thyself.  
ayndiu, p. p. in you or ye; -ish, id. em.  
ayn-diu-hene, p. p. [in] yourselves.  
ayns, pre. in, within; em.  
ayns-polt, adv. in an instant, in as short a 
time as a blow could be given.  
ayns-shen, adv. there.  
ayns-shid, adv. yonder.  
ayns-shoh, adv. here, in this place.  
ayns-traa, adv. in time, timely. 
ayns-wheesh, conj. inasmuch, insomuch.  
sy, pre. & art. in the, an abbreviation of 
ayns y, the two last letters used before 
consonants.  
syn, pre. & art. in the; an abbreviation of 
ayns yn, the three last letters used before 
words initialled by vowels.  
ayndagh, s. m. an index; pl. -yn.  
ayr, s. m. father; pl. -aghyn.  
e hayr, s. her father; pl. -aghyn. A  
ayrey, a. d. of or belonging to father.  
e hayrey, a. d. of her father or fathers; Gen. 
xxix. 13: As haink eh gy-kione, tra cheayll 
Laban imraa jeh Jacob mac e hayrey, dy roie 
eh ny whail. And it came to pass, when Laban 
heard the tidings of Jacob his sister’s son, that 
he ran to meet him. A  
ayroil, a. fatherly, paternal.  
liass ayr, s. m. a step father. [...] seldom 
used. 
ard-ayraghyn, s. pl. principal fathers, chief 
fathers; 1 Chron. xxiv. 31: Hayrn ad shoh 
lottyn myrgeddin myr ren nyn mraaraghyn mec 
Aaron, fenish Ghavid y ree, as Zadok, as 
Ahimelech, as ard-gheiney ayraghyn ny 
saggyrtyn as ny Leviteyn, eer ny ard-ayraghyn 
myr ren nyn mraaraghyn saa. These likewise 
cast lots over against their brethren the sons of 
Aaron in the presence of David the king, and 
Zadok, and Ahimelech, and the chief of the 
fathers of the priests and Levites, even the 
principal fathers over against their younger 
brethren; Neh. vii. 71: As hug paart jeh ny 
ard-ayraghyn, gys stoyr yn obbyr, feed 
thousane peesh dy airh, as daa housane as 
daa cheead punt dy argid. And some of the 
chief of the fathers gave to the treasure of the 
work twenty thousand drams of gold, and two 
thousand and two hundred pound of silver. 
shenn-ayr, s. m. fore-father, progenitor. 
shaner, s. m. grandfather; dty henn shaner 
(thy great grand father). 
ayrn, s. m. part, share, portion; pl. -yn.  
e hayrn, s. her share; pl. -yn. A  
co-ayrnagh, s. m. a partaker; Rom. xv. 27: 
Son my ta ny Ashoonee er ny ve jeant co-
ayrnee jeh ny nheeghyn spyrrydoil ocsyn, yn 
currym oc eh myrgeddin dy hirveish orroosyn 
27 
A 
 
ayns nheeghyn seihltagh. For if the Gentiles 
have been made partakers of their spiritual 
things, their duty is also to minister unto them in 
carnal things. 
28 
B 
 
B  
B, as a radical initial, and the changes it 
undergoes, see Remark 42 and 43. Words 
primarily in p, change their initials to b, as, 
peccah (sin); nyn beccah (their, our, or your 
sin). This letter and s have some connexion 
in a few words, but which is radical is not 
well known; as, bare (best), future tense; 
share (best), present tense; bione dou (I 
knew); shione dou (l know); baillym (l 
would. wish), saillym (I do wish), &c.  
baa, s. m. a buss, a salutation with the lips.  
baagh, s. m. a beast.  
yn vaagh, s. the beast. B 
nyn maagh, s. your, &c. beast. B 
beiyn, s. pl. beasts; the pl. of baagh. 
e veiyn, s. his beasts, of cattle. B 
nyn meiyn, s. pl. your, &c. beasts. B  
baaieagh, s. m. a cow house.  
yn vaaieagh, s. the vaccary or cow house. 
B 
nyn maaieagh, s. your, &c. cowhouse. B 
baaihn, s. m. a cow’s or beast’s heam; pl. 
-yn.  
yn vaaihn, s. the heam. B 
baair, s. m. a crop, what is cut off the land at 
a time; pl. see bhir.  
e vaair, s. his crop; pl. -yn. B  
nyn maair, s. your, &c. crop; pl. -yn. B 
bhir, s. pl.  
e vhir, s. his crops. B 
nyn mhir, s. your, &c. crops. B 
aa-vaair, s. m. second crop. 
baaish, s. the forehead or temple; pl. -yn; 
Judges v. 26: Hug ee e laue gys y treiney, as 
e laue yesh gys hammar yn obbree as lesh yn 
hammar woaill ee Sisera, woaill ee trooid e 
chione eh, tra v’ee er hoylley as er woalley 
trooid baaishyn e ching. She put her hand to 
the nail, and her right hand to the workmen’s 
hammer; and with the hammer she smote 
Sisera, she smote off his head, when she had 
pierced and stricken through his temples.  
e vaaish, s. his visage or face. 
baanrit, a. insane, distracted, lunatic, out of 
right senses.  
thie baanrit, s. m. a bedlam. 
baar, v. spend; -agh, 77; -ail, 78; -ee, 80. 
vaar, v. did spend; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. B 
er vaarail, v. hath, &c. spent. B  
nyn maarail, s. your, &c. spending. B 
baarit, pt. spent.  
s’baarit, a. how spent. B  
baareyder, s. m. a spender.  
baar-aadjin, an herb of the heath class.  
baard, v. 
nagh vaardagh, v. would not, &c. prevail. 
[B]  
nagh vaardee, v. will not, &c. prevail; 
John, xii. 19: Nagh vaik shiu, nagh vaardee 
shiu monney? Perceive ye how ye prevail 
nothing? B 
baare, v. 
vaare, v. did bare or poll; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B  
vare. See vaare. B  
baarey, v. making bare, cutting roughness 
off.  
dy vaarey, v. to make bare, or cut off 
roughness. B 
baarit, pt. made bare.  
s’baarit, a. how bare made. B  
ro vaarit, 85. too spent or bared. B 
baareyder, s. m. a person who makes bare.  
baare, s. m. point, end, tip; pl. -yn. Chur eh 
dys baare vie eh (he put it to a good end).  
dty vaare, s. thy point; pl. -yn B 
nyn maare, s. your, &c. point. B 
baare-y-lane, s. m. high-water-mark.  
baarelagh, s. m. the top on corn or meal; 
the refuse of grain in the act of sifting. 
yn vaarelagh, s. the refuse of grain. B 
Baarle, s. f. the English or British language. 
dty Vaarle, s. thy English. B  
nyn Maarle, s. your, &c. English. 
Baarlagh, a. English or British; 
exclusively used in speaking of the English 
language.  
s’Baarlagh, a, how much in the English 
tone of language. B 
s’Baarlee, a. id., comp. and sup. B 
29 
B 
 
ben Vaarlagh, a. a woman that speaks 
English. B 
baase, s. m. death; pl. -yn.  
e vaase, s. his death. B 
nyn maase or maash, s. your, &c. death, 
visage. B  
baaish, a. d. of death.  
e vaaish, s. [of] his death. 
fail-y-vaaish, a. the failure of death, past 
recovery, sickness to death. 
marre-vaaish, s. a pall, or covering used in 
olden times before the use of coffins, to put 
over the dead body on the bier.  
e var-vaaish, s. his pall. M 
baasoil, a. deadly, deathlike, fatal; -ey, a. 
pl. id.  
s’baasoil; a. how deathly or deadly. B 
s’baasoiley, a. id., comp. and sup. B 
feer vaasoil, a. very deathly or deadly. B 
neu-vaasoil, a. immortal. 
baatey, s. f. a boat; pl. 69 [change -ey to -yn].  
e vaatey, s. his boat; pl. 69.  
nyn maatey, s. your, &c. boat. B 
bab, s. m. a babe; pl. -yn.  
yn vab, s. the babe. B 
nyn mab, s. your, &c. baby. B 
baban, or babban, s. m. a baby or doll; the 
dim. of bab.  
yn vaban, s. the baby. B 
babbaney, v. cockering, indulging.  
bab, s. m. a lappet of the ear in marking 
sheep; pl. -yn.  
yn vab, s. the sheep mark. B 
baccagh, a. halt, maimed; s. m. a person halt 
or disabled; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
s’baccagh, a. how halt or maimed B  
s’baccee, a. id., comp. and sup. B 
yn vaccagh, s. the halt person. B 
nyn maccagh, s. your, &c. halt, &c. person. 
B 
back, adv. when applied to motion, the same 
as the English word.  
bad, s. m. a bat; as bad cam[m]ag ; pl. -yn.  
baggyr, v. threaten, insult, denounce; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -ey, 82; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
vaggyr or vaggyree, v. did threaten or 
rebuke; Mark, ix. 25: Tra honnick Yeesey dy 
row yn pobble ayns preis chionney dy cheilley, 
vaggyr eh er y spyrryd neu-ghlen. When Jesus 
saw that the people came running together, he 
rebuked the foul spirit; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. B 
baggyrt, v. threatening, insulting, 
denouncing, pl. -yn.  
dy vaggyrt, v. to threaten, insult. B  
nyn maggyrt, v. your, &c. threatening, &c. 
B 
baggyragh, a. d. of threatening, &c.  
baggyrtagh, a. in a threatening manner, 
roughly, Gen. xlii. 30: Yn dooinney ta chiarn 
ny cheerey, loayr eh dy baggyrtagh rooin, as 
ghow eh shin son peeikearyn ’sy cheer. The 
man, who is the lord of the land, spake roughly 
to us, and took us for spies of the country; s. m. 
one who is a threatener; pl. 71[change -agh 
to -ee].  
yn vaggyrtagh, s. the threatener. B  
feer vaggyragh or vaggyrtagh, [a.] very 
threatening or insulting, &c. B  
s’bagg[y]ragh or s’baggyrtagh, a. how 
threatening or insulting, how menacing. B 
s’baggyrtee, a. id., comp. and sup. B 
baggyrey 
yn vaggyrey, s. the threatener. B  
nyn maggyrey, s. your, &c. threatener. B 
baggyrtys, s. f. a menace, insult, a 
denunciation of evil.  
baght, s. m. discernment, observation, 
penetration.  
e vaght, s. his discernment or observation. 
B 
nyn maght, s. your, &c. observation, &c. B 
baghtal, a. plain, obvious, manifest, 
evident, conspicuous.  
s’baghtal, a. how plain, obvious, manifest, 
evident, distinct, clear, discernible, &c.; 
comp. and sup. B  
feer vaghtal, a. very distinctly, plain, 
obvious, clear, evident. B 
neu-vaghtal, a. indistinct, undiscerniblc. 
baghyl, s. f. a staff or badge of authority, a 
Bishop’s staff.  
30 
B 
 
baie, s. f. a bay; pl. -aghyn.  
yn vaie, s. the bay; pl. -aghyn. B 
baih, v. drown; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83.  
vaih, v. did drown; -agh; -in; -ym; -ys, 
94.B 
er vaih, v. hath, &c., drowned. B  
nyn maih, v. your, &c. drowning. B 
baighey, v. drowning.  
baiht, pt. drowned; 85.  
s’baiht, a. how drowned. B 
lieh vaiht, 85. half drowned. B  
neu-vaiht, a. undrowned. 
baiheyder, s. m. a drowner; pl. -yn.  
bainney, s. m. milk; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
nyn mainney, s. your, &c. milk. B 
bainney clabbagh, or bainney geir, 
curdled or sour milk.  
mastey-bainney, v. churning milk. 
bainnagh, a. d. of milk, milky.  
balk, s. m. a piece missed in ploughing. Prov. 
“Ny jean balk jeh thalloo mie.” [Don’t 
make a baulk out of good earth.] 
balley, s. m. a, town, an estate. Has this word 
any analogy to boal or boalley (a wall or 
fence)? Perhaps an estate or town was not 
called so until it was fenced round, or 
walled; pl. baljyn.  
yn valla or valley, s. the town or estate. B  
nyn malley, s. your, &c. town, estate. B 
e valjyn, s. his towns or estates. B  
nyn maljyn, s. your, &c. towns, estates. B  
balley-beg-çheerey, s. m. a village.  
Balley-Chashtal, s. m. Castletown, the 
metropolis of the Island; situate on the 
southern shore of the parish of Malew, so 
named from its fine Castle, which was built 
about the year 960.  
balley-hallooin, s. m. a farm.  
balley-mergee, s. m. a market town.  
ard-valley, s. m. a city; pl. 70 [ard-valjyn]. 
dy valley, adv. of home, homeward. B 
baljey, a. d. of a town, or an estate.  
balloo, a. dumb; s. m. the dumb.  
s’balloo, a. how dumb, comp. and sup. B 
feer valloo, a. very deaf [sic]. Yn toddag 
valloo (the dumb cake). B  
ballooid, s. m. dumbness. 
e vallooid, s. his dumbness. B 
bane, a. white.  
s’bane, a. how white. B 
s’banee or s’baney, id., comp. and sup. B 
feer vane, a. very white. B  
baney, a. pl. white; as, deiney baney (white 
men).  
vaney, a. pl. white; as, kirree vaney (white 
sheep). B 
feeyn-bane, s. m. white wine. 
baneagh or baneaghey, v. whitening.  
dy vaneaghey, v. to whiten. B  
er vaneagh, v. hath, &c. whitened. B  
nyn maneagh, v. your, &c. whitening. B 
s’banit, a. how whitened. B 
baneid, s. m. whiteness.  
e vaneid, s. his whiteness. B  
banee, a. whiteish.  
banee, a. binding; as cront banee (a binding 
knot)  
banejagh or banjagh, s. f. lea land, land left 
for grass, or rather to feed milch cattle on. 
The word may be from bainney (milk, 
milch land).  
yn vanjagh, s. the lea land. B 
nyn manjagh, s. your, &c. lea land. B  
banjee, a. d. of lea land; as, magher banjee 
(a lea field).  
bangan, s. m. a branch; pl. -yn.  
yn vangan, s. the branch. B 
nyn mangan, s. your, &c. branch. B  
banganagh, a. branchy.  
s’banganagh, a. how branchy. B 
s’banganee, a. id., comp. and sup. B 
feer vanganagh, a. very branchy. B 
banglane, s. m. a bough; pl. -yn.  
yn vanglane, s. the bough. B 
nyn manglane, s. your, &c. bough. B  
banglaneagh, a. having many boughs.  
s’banglaneagh, a. how full of boughs. 
Prov. “S’banglaneagh yn phy’agh.” 
[Prolific is the person.] B  
s’banglanee, a. id., comp. and sup. B 
feer vanglaneagh, a. very full of boughs. B 
neu-van[g]lanagh, a. without boughs. 
31 
B 
 
banistie, s. m. housewifery, the management 
of house affairs or of a family by a 
mistress.  
e vanisthie (sic: stress), s. his management 
of house affairs. B 
nyn manisthie, s. your, &c. management of 
house affairs. B 
ben-isthie or ban-isthie, which see.  
bann or bannee, v. to bless; -agh, 77; -aghey, 
82; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88.  
bannee jee, v. bless ye.  
bannee Jee shiu, in. God bless you or ye.  
vann or vannee, v. did bless; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B 
bannaghey 
er vannaghey, v. hath, &c. blessed. B 
nyn mannaghey, v. your, &c. blessing. B 
bannit, pt. blessed; 85.  
s’bannit, a. how blessed. B 
feer vannit, a. very blessed. B  
bannee 
s’bannee, a. how blest, how calm or fine; 
comp. and sup. B 
feer vannee, a. very blessed, calm, or 
tranquil. B 
bannaght, s. m. a blessing or benediction.  
yn vannaght, s. the blessing. B  
nyn mannaght, s. your, &c. blessing. B 
bannish, s. f. a wedding.  
yn vannish, s. the wedding. B 
nyn mannish, s. your, &c. wedding. B  
banjyn, s. pl. weddings.  
e vanjyn, s. his weddings. B  
nyn manshyn or manjyn, s. your, &c. 
weddings. B 
banshey, a. d. of a wedding.  
ben vanshey, a. d. of a wedding woman. B 
ben-vanshey, s. f. a woman who attends a 
wedding. 
bannag, s. f. I cannot tell what this word 
means, if not the Manks of ballad. I have 
heard it used for a rhyme said or sung on 
Hollantide eve. The Welsh have bann for a 
poem, and a bannag for an article.  
yn vannag, s. the ballad; pl. -yn. B 
bantan, s. m. a bantling; pl. -yn.  
yn vantan, s. the bantling. B 
barb, a. harsh, rough, severe.  
s’barb, a. how harsh or rough. B 
s’barbey, a. id., comp. and sup. B 
feer varb, a. very harsh, rough, or severe. 
B 
neu-varb, a. unharsh, pleasing. 
barbey, a. pl. harsh, rough.  
barbagh, adv. harshly.  
s’barbagh, a. how harsh or rough. B 
ro varbagh, a. too harsh, &c. B 
e varbid, s. his harshness. B 
bardagh or bardoonagh, s. m. a poet, a bard; 
pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]; Acts, xvii. 28: 
Son aynsyn ta shin bio, as bioyr, as baghey; 
myr sheer da paart jeh ny bardoonee eu hene 
ta gra. For in him we live, and move, and have 
our being; as certain also of your own poets 
have said. 
nyn mardoonagh, s. your, &c. tragical 
poet. B 
bardoon, s. m. a doleful song.  
e vardoon, s. his doleful song. B 
nyn mardoon, s. your, &c. doleful song. B 
bardoonys, s. m. tragical poetry.  
e vardoonys, s. his tragical singing. B 
bargane, s. m. a bargain, a deed.  
e vargane, s. his bargain; pl. -yn. B 
nyn margane, s. your, &c. bargain. B 
bargane creck, s. m. a deed of sale.  
bargane gioalteeagh, s. m. a deed of 
mortgage.  
bargane soiagh, s. m. a lease.  
bargane nashtee, s. m. a matrimonial 
contract.  
bargane, v. bargain; -agh, 77; -e, 80; -y, 
82; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
vargan, v. did or didst bargain; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B 
dy varganey, v. to bargain. B 
s’barganit, a. how bargained. B 
barganeyder, s. m. a bargainer. 
yn varganeyder, s. the bargainer; pl. -yn B  
feer varganagh, a. very much for bargains. 
B 
barnagh, s. f. a. limpet, a common kind of 
shell fish which adheres to rock; it is also 
called flitter, in English, in this Island; <pl. 
32 
B 
 
67> [pl. 71: change -agh to -ee].  
yn varnagh, s. the limpet or flitter; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. B  
nyn marnagh, s. your, &c. limpit, flitter. B 
barney, s. f. a breach, a gap; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn].  
baarney, s. f. See barney.  
yn vaarney, s. the breach or gap. B 
yn varney, s. the gap or breach. “Tou er y 
varney veayl.” [Thou art on the bald gap.] 
B 
nyn maarney, s. your, &c. gap; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn]. B 
Baroole, s. m. There are two mountains of 
this name in the Island, said to derive their 
names from their summits resembling the 
tops of apples; as, baare ooyle (the top of 
an apple). Probably a corruption of its 
Ancient Norse name, which was Wardfell.  
barr 
yn varr, s. the bar of the court or port. B  
barragh, s. f. tow, the shorts of lint, cloth 
made of tow; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
yn varragh, s. the tow. B 
nyn marragh, s. your, &c. tow. B 
barree, a. d. of tow, or tow cloth.  
eggey varree, a. d. a web of tow. B 
barrant or barrantys, s. m. assurance, 
warrantry, warrant, stress, confidence.  
e varrant, s. his assurance, &c. B 
nyn marrant, s. your, &c. assurance. B 
e varantys, s. his warrantry, assurance, or 
confidence. B 
e varrantys, s. See varantys. B  
nyn marantys, s. your, &c. confidence, 
warrantry. B 
barrantagh a. confidant, worthy of trust or 
confidence.  
var-a-mish, p. I’ll warrant. 
barrel 
yn varrel, s. the barrel. B 
barrey, s. m. a bar, a bolt; pl. 67 [change -ey 
to -aghyn].  
yn varrey, s. the bar. B 
barrey, s. m. a barrow; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
yn varrey, s. the barrow. B 
barrey laue, s. < f.> a hand barrow  
barrey queeylagh, s. <f.> a wheel-barrow.  
barriaght, s. f. victory; pl. -yn.  
yn varriaght, s. the victory or dominion. B 
nyn marriaght, s. your, &c. victory. B 
barriaghtys, s. m. victoriousness.  
bart, s. m. a burthen, load. 
e vart, s. his burden. B 
nyn mart, s. your, &c. burden. B  
buirht, s. pl. burdens.  
bashlagh, s. m. a dash or douse of water.  
yn vashlagh, s. the douse. B 
nyn mashlagh, s. your, &c. dash of water. 
B 
basht, v. baptize, christen; -agh, 77.  
vasht, v. did baptize; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. B  
er vashtey, v. hath, &c. baptized. B 
bashtit, pt. baptized; 85.  
s’bashtit, a. how much or well baptized. B 
ro vashtit, 85. too much baptized. B 
neu-vashtit, a. unbaptized. 
bashtey, s. m. baptism; pl. 67 [change -ey 
to -aghyn].  
nyn mashtey, s. your, &c. baptism. B 
bashtee, a. d. of baptism or baptising.  
vashtee, a. d. of baptism; as, yn tobbyr 
vashtee (the baptismal font). B 
bashteyder, s. m. a baptizer; pl. -yn.  
yn vashteyder, s. the baptizer. B  
baskaid or bastag, s. f. a basket; pl. -yn.  
yn vaskaid, s. the basket. B 
nyn maskaid, s. your, &c. basket. B 
baskaid-wuigh, s. f. the wild or field 
marygold.  
yn vaskaid wee, s. the wild or field 
marygold. B 
bass, s. f. the palm of the hand; the blade of 
an oar; pl. -yn. 
dty vass, s. thy palm; pl. -yn. B  
nyn mass, s. your, &c. palm; pl. -yn; Jud. 
vii. 6: As yn earroo ocsyn ren giu ass nyn 
mass, va three cheead dooinney: agh ren 
ooilley yn chooid elley jeh’n pobble croymmey 
sheese er nyn glioonyn dy iu ushtey. And the 
number of them that lapped, putting their hand 
33 
B 
 
to their mouth, were three hundred men: but all 
the rest of the people bowed down upon their 
knees to drink water. B 
bassey, a. d. of the palm.  
bwoailley-bassey, s. m. a slap; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn]. 
bassag, s. f. a frivolous sport in which 
those employed slap each others’ hands.  
bastagh, in. pity. 
bastal 
er bastal, adv. past, past all.  
baulk, s. m. a long-line to fish with; pl. -yn.  
baum, s. m. balm.  
bayllee, s. m. a bailiff; pl. -yn. 
yn vayllee, s. the bailiff. B 
bayr or beyr, s. m. a way, avenue, lane; pl. 
-nyn or -yn.  
yn vayr or veyr, s. the way, lane, &c. B 
yn veyr or vayr, s. the lane, way, or 
avenue. B  
nyn mayr, s. your, &c. lane or way. B 
bayrn, s. m. a cap pl. -yn.  
yn vayrn, s. the cap used instead of a hat. B 
nyn mayrn, s. your, &c. cap. B 
bayrn caggee, s. m. a helmet.  
bayrn mooar, s. m. a sea nettle.  
Baytnag or Badlag, s. f. the planet Venus.  
be 
dy-be or dy-bey, adv. for cause, because. 
See also erbey.  
dy ve, v. to be, being. B  
er ve, v. hath, &c. been, was. B 
er-ny-ve, v. hath or having, &c. been.  
er-ve, v. have, &c. been.  
bee v. be, will be.  
bee-ee, v. will she be, or she will be. 
bhidee, she will be; -ish; id. em.  
bee-oo, v. thou wilt be; pronounced bou.  
boo, v. (a contraction of bee-oo) thou wilt 
be or wilt thou be; -uss, id. em.  
bee-dty-host, in. silence, or be thou silent. 
bee-jee, v. be ye or you.  
vees, v. will or shall be. B 
my vee’m, p. if I be; -s, id. em.  
veign, v. I were, I would be; -ish, id. em. B 
dy beign, v. if I were, or would be. 
beagh, v. would be, should be.  
veagh, v. would be, were, wert, wouldst. B 
 
nee 
cha nee, v. is not, will not, not as; Eph. v. 
15: Jeeagh-jee eisht dy jean shiu gimmeeaght 
dy tastagh, cha nee myr ommydanyn, agh myr 
sleih creeney. See then that ye walk 
circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise. Had 
this word been written ne or ney and not the 
same as nee (will), I think it would have 
been much better; as too many meanings 
under the same form perplex the memory.  
dy nee, v. that is, that were, that was. dy re 
is used for this word in common 
conversation, which see.  
 
nel 
cha nel, v. is not, am not, are not, art not. 
This, i[n] colloquial talk, is often the 
negative answer to the interrogative vel. 
Cha nee has also the same meaning, but the 
question must be put differently; as, vel oo 
goll thie (art thou going home)? The 
answer negatively would be cha vel or cha 
nel; but if the question be asked thus, nee 
goll thie, t’ou (is it going home thou art)? 
The answer negatively would be cha nee (is 
not, or am), instead of nel; vel is always 
used in sacred or solemn discourse.  
 
row, v. was, wast, were, wert. 
row, p. wast thou; -s, id. em.  
r’ou, p. thou was, wast thou? 1 Kings, 
xviii. 10: …as tra dooyrt ad, Nagh row eh 
ayns shen, ghow eh loo jeh’n reeriaght as yn 
ashoon, nagh r’ou ry-gheddyn. …and when 
they said, He is not there; he took an oath of 
the kingdom and nation, that they found thee 
not; -s, id. em. 
 
re, v. is, as; dy re (that is); Hymn Book. 
 
she, adv. yes, yea, ay. This word, which is 
a contraction of shen eh, literally (that's it) 
to sh’eh and the last h cast off. There is 
another yes in the Manks. See ta.  
 
34 
B 
 
ta, v. (present tense) am, are, art, is; is an 
answer in the affirmative corresponding 
with yes, or ay, in English, though not the 
same part of speech. Ta mee (I am); ta shin 
(we are); ta oo, or as contracted, t’ou (thou 
art); ta eh, or as contracted, t’eh (he is); and 
as contracted for the neuter gender, te (it 
is). There are other words that answer 
affirmatively when the question is put to 
suit them, as, she (yes); nee (will); fod 
(can); &c., &c. the answers negatively 
would be cha nee, cha jean, cha vod, &c. 
There is great nicety in these replies; but 
however illiterate the Manksman maybe, he 
never fails using the proper word. Ta is 
only used in assertions and affirmations: 
see vel, which has the same meaning in 
interrogations.  
cre t’ayd, what hast thou? -s id. em.  
cre t’aym, what have I? -s, id. em. 
cre t’ayn, what is in? -s and -syn, id. em.  
cre t’echey, p. what hath he[?]; -syn, id. 
em. 
cre t’oc, p. p. what have they[?]; -syn, id. 
em. 
eh ta dy my choyrt, he who has sent me. 
ta shen dy ghra, adv. that is to say, to wit. 
ta’d, pro. v. (from ta ad), they are; -syn, id. 
em.  
t’ain, pro. v. we have; -yn, id. em. 
tar ad, p. they are. A corruption of ta’ad. 
See ta’d. 
te, p. it, it is. I know not the reason of the 
difference made in the orthography of this 
word from that of t[’]eh, (the masculine 
gender), as both words are sounded alike, 
except it be to show where the neuter 
gender occurs in English. See 102.  
t’ec, p. she has or hath; -ish, id. em. a 
contraction of ta ec; it is also used in the 
masculine, as in, ooilley ny t’ec dooinney 
ver eh son e vioys (all that a man hath will 
he give for his life).  
t’ee, p. she is; -ish, id. em. 
t’eh, p. he is. This ought also to be, it is. 
See te. 
t’ehsyn. See t[’]eshyn; the em. of t’eh.  
t’eshyn, p. he is, emphatically. E  
t’eu, p. you having or your having; -ish, id. 
em. 
t[’]orrin, p. p. on us; -yn, id. em. 
t[’]orroo, p. p. on them; -syn, id. em. 
t[’]orrym, p. p. on me; -s, id. em. 
t[’]ort, p. p. on thee; -s. id. em. 
t[’]ou, p. thou art; -uss, thou art, em.  
 
va, v. was, were. 
va’n (from va yn), it was or were.  
v’eh, p. he was, he were. B 
ve, v. was, were, it was or were. 
v[’]eshyn, p. he was or were; em.B 
v’ee, p. she was or were; -ish, id. em. B 
v[’]ou, p. thou wert; -ys, id. em.  
v’oo, p. See v[’]ou, thou wert. 
v[’]ad, p. they were; -syn, id. em.  
v’aym, p. I had; -s id. em.  
v’ort, p. p. on thee; -s, id. em.  
v’ayndoo, p. in them; -syn, id. em.  
v’eu, p. ye or you had; a contraction of va 
eu; -ish, id. em.  
v’oc, p. they had, that they had; a 
contraction of va oc; -syn, id. em.  
 
vel, v. is, are, art, am, (interrogatively). Ta, 
is Manks of the same words in answering 
or replying. B 
 
bea, s. f. life, life-time.  
yn vea, s. the life time. 
e vea, s. his life time.  
nyn mea, s. your, &c. life, the conduct or 
general manner a person behaves in life. B 
vea, s. ado; as, cre hon t’ou cummal 
wheesh dy vea ort [?] [Why art thou 
keeping so much ado on thee?] 
bea-veayn, s. m. eternal life, eternal 
duration.  
oltaghey-bea, s. refreshment in life by 
being brought to partake of meat, drink or 
sleep which sustain nature; Acts, xxviii. 7: 
Ayns ny ardjyn shen va thieyn as thalloo lesh 
kiannoort ny hellan, va enmyssit Publius, hug 
dooin oltaghey-bea, as aaght ry three laa dy 
arryltagh. In the same quarters were 
possessions of the chief man of the island, 
whose name was Publius; who received us, 
and lodged us three days courteously. 
35 
B 
 
shee dy vea, welcome. 
beayn, a. eternal, immortal, permanent, 
perpetual, durable, lasting.  
 s’beayn, a. how durable, lasting or 
permanent, how immortal or eternal. Prov. 
“Quoi erbee s’beayn cha beayn y 
çhenndiaght.” [Whoever is mortal, it is not 
the aged.] And, “S’beayn dagh olk.” 
[Lasting is each evil.] B  
 s’beayney, a. id., comp. and sup. B 
 ro veayn, a. too permanent or lasting. B 
 neu-veayn, a. unpermanent. 
 dy voddey beayn y ree, long live the 
king, or long may the king live; 2 Kings, xi. 
12; As hug eh lesh magh mac y ree, as hug eh 
yn crown er, as livrey eh da lioar y leigh: as ren 
ad eh ny ree, as d’ooilee ad eh; as woaill ad 
nyn massyn cooidjagh, as dooyrt ad, Dy 
voddey beayn y ree. And he brought forth the 
king’s son, and put the crown upon him, and 
gave him the testimony; and they made him 
king, and anointed him; and they clapped their 
hands, and said, God save the king.  
 bea-veayn, s. m. eternal life, eternal 
duration. 
 beaynaghey, v. prolonging, 
lengthening; Prov. x. 27: Ta aggle y Chiarn 
beaynaghey laghyn: agh bee bleeantyn ny 
mee-chrauee goit giare. The fear of the Lord 
prolongeth days: but the years of the wicked 
shall be shortened. 
dy veaynaghey, v. to prolong, to 
perpetuate. B  
 beaynid, s. m. eternity, perpetuity, 
immortality, duration without end. 
 yn veaynid, s. the eternity, or eternal 
duration. B 
 nyn meaynid, s. your, &c. eternity or 
eternal duration. B  
beaoil, a. moral. 
beays, s. m. being, existence.  
beagh, v. live, feed. -agh, 77; -ee, 80.  
veagh or vagh, v. did or didst live or feed; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94.B  
beaghey, v. feeding, living, liveth.  
beiyhaghey, v. feeding; Mat. viii. 30: As 
tammylt voue va beiyhaghey griagh mooar dy 
vuckyn. And there was a good way off from 
them an herd of many swine feeding.  
er veaghey, v. hath, &c. lived, fed. B 
beaghey, s. m. food, victuals, sustenance.  
yn veaghey, s. the food or living. B 
nyn meaghey, s. your, &c. food, living, 
sustenance, victuals. 
baghit, pt. bred, fed. See beaghit [deest]: 
85.  
beeyt or beeiyt, 85; fatted, fed, stall fed. 
s’beeit, a. how well fed; comp. and sup. B 
beagheyder, s. m. a feeder, a sustainer; pl. 
-yn. 
 
bagh or beagh, v. dwell, inhabit, live.  
vagh, v. did dwell or inhabit; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B  
baghey, v. dwelling, inhabiting; John i<i>. 
38: Dooyrt adsyn rish, Rabbi (ta shen dy ghra, 
‘sy ghlare ainyn, Vainshter) cre raad t’ou 
baghey? They said unto him, Rabbi, (which is 
to say, being interpreted, Master), where 
dwellest thou? 
dy vaghey, v. to live, dwell or inhabit. B 
dy veaghey, v. to live or dwell. B 
er veaghey, v. hath, &c. lived, dwelt. B 
baghee, a. d. of a dwelling, of living.  
beaghee, a. d. of living or dwelling.  
vaghee, a. d. of dwelling. B 
veaghee, a. d. of living or dwelling. B 
aght[-]baghee, s. m. manner of life, 
occupation; 2 Tim. iii. 10: Agh t’ou uss dy 
slane er hoiggal my ynsagh, my aght-baghee, 
my chiarail my chredjue, my hurranse-foddey, 
my ghraih, my veenid. But thou hast fully 
known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, 
faith, longsuffering, charity, patience; Jonah i. 
8: Insh dooin, ta shin guee ort, quoi by-
chyndagh ta’n olk shoh er jeet orrin: cre ta dty 
aght beaghee? Tell us, we pray thee, for 
whose cause this evil is upon us; What is thine 
occupation? 
fir-vaghee or veaghee, s. pl. livers, 
dwellers, inhabitants. 
thie veaghee, s. f. a dwelling house. 
ynnyd-veaghee, s. f. a dwelling place. 
beam, s. m. what is cut by a sickle at once in 
reaping; a mark cut in the ear of a sheep; pl. 
-yn.  
36 
B 
 
beark, s. f. a corn; pl. -yn. 
birk, s. pl. the pl. of beark, corns.  
beaynee, s. m.f. a reaper, a shearer; pl. -yn. 
yn veaynee, s. the reaper or shearer. B.  
nyn meayn<n>ee, s. your, &c. reaper. B 
laue veayney, a. d. hand of the shearer. B 
beck, s. f. a bench in a boat; pl. -yn.  
bee, s. m. meat, food, fodder.  
e vee, s. his meat or food. B 
nyn mee, s. your, &c. meat, food. 
bee brisht, s. m. offal, giblets.  
bee-cooag, s. f. woodsorrel.  
bee-muck, s. f. the herb sowthistle; by 
some called bainney-muck because when 
broken or cut it exudes a milky juice.  
bee naight, s. m. a novelty in meat, some 
new or delicate meat to eat, a dainty.  
beeal, s. m. mouth; pl. see beill. This word is 
also used for an entrance or passage; as, 
beeal voaldy (the entrance into May); beeal 
y phurt (the entrance into the harbour).  
beill s. pl. mouths, the plural of beeal. 
dty veeal, s. thy mouth. B 
nyn meeal, s. your, &c. mouth. B 
beealaghyn, s. m. the. bits of a bridle.  
e veealaghyn, s. his bridle bits. B 
nyn meealaghyn, s. your, &c. bridle bits. B 
beealerey, s. m.f. a babbler, a talkative 
person; pl. 69 [change -ey to -yn]. 
yn veealerey, s. the babbler. B  
nyn meealerey, s. your, &c. babbler. B 
beealeragh(t), v. 
dy veealeraght, v. to babble or tattle. B 
nyn meea<y>leragh, v. your, &c. babbling. 
B 
beeal-freayn, adv. (from beeal-freayney) in 
a hasty manner, abruptly. The simile is 
taken from an animal that is run or wrought 
hard, and foams at the mouth.  
beeal-mullag, s. m. bung-hole of a cask. 
beealloo, a. d. of or convenient to or for the 
mouth or front; as, bee-beealloo (mouth’s 
meat). 
çheu veealloo, s. front or mouth side. B 
nyn meealloo, a. d. their, &c. of the mouth 
or before their mouth. B 
beeataig, s. f. a jade, a hussy; pl. -yn.  
beg, a. little, small, diminutive.  
s’beg, a. how little or small, little indeed. B 
sloo, a. smaller, smallest, less, least. Prov. 
“Myr sloo yn cheshaght smoo yn ayrn.” 
[The smaller the company, the bigger the 
share.] 
 fer-sloo 
 yn er-sloo, s. the least, mas; Jer. viii. 
10: Shen-y-fa ver-yms ny mraane oc da 
feallagh elley, as ny magheryn oc da eiraghyn 
joarree: son ta dy chooilley unnane, veih’n er-
sloo gys yn er-smoo, sondagh er cosney; 
veih’n phadeyr eer gys y taggyrt, ta dy chooilley 
unnane dellal dy foalsey. Therefore will I give 
their wives unto others, and their fields to them 
that shall inherit them: for every one from the 
least even unto the greatest is given to 
covetousness, from the prophet even unto the 
priest every one dealeth falsely. F 
 ny slooid, conj. unless, except, if not. 
Prov. “Ta keeayll ommidjys ny slooid ny 
t’ee ec dooinney creeney dy reayll.” [Wit is 
foolishness, unless a wise man has it to 
keep.] 
 by-loo or by-sloo, adv. smallest, fewest; 
Deut. vii. 7: Cha nee son dy row shiuish ny 
shlee ayns earroo, dy hoie yn Chiarn e ghraih 
erriu, ny dy ren eh nyn reih (son va shiuish yn 
ashoon by-loo jeh dy chooilley ashoon). The 
Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose 
you, because ye were more in number than any 
people; for ye were the fewest of all people.  
feer veg, a. very little; ro veg, too little. Veg 
is also understood to mean none or nothing; 
as, cha daag eh veg dou, (he left nothing or 
none for me); veg share na, (no better 
than).  
nyn meg, s. your, &c. little. B  
soiagh-beg, v. despising, slighting. 
thie veg, s. f. a necessary or privy. 
cloan veggey, a. pl. little children. B  
mooinjer-veggey, s. pl. little ones about 
one. 
beggan, v.[sic, l. a.] less than little; the dim. 
of little. 
 yn veggan, s. the little. See beggan. B 
 nyn meggan, s. your, dim. of little. B  
 beggan-beg, adv. little or nothing.  
 beggan-jou-ee-ort, a bad wish; it either 
37 
B 
 
means too little drink, or too little appetite.  
 beggan-ny-booise, little thanks. 
 ny veggan as ny veggan, adv. by little 
and little, gradually. B  
beggid, s. m. littleness, diminutiveness.  
yn veggid, s. the littleness. B  
nyn meggid, s. your, &c. littleness. B  
behtt, v. wager, bet; -agh, 77; -al, 79; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88; pl. -yn; s. m. a wager; pl. -yn.  
dy vehttal, v. to wager or bet; -agh, &c. B 
behtteyder, s. m. a wagerer, a better.  
beihll, v. grind, bray; [s.] pl. -aghyn; -agh.  
e veihllaghyn, s. his grindings. B  
nyn meihllaghyn, s. your, &c. grindings. B 
bheill, v. grind; Num. xi. 8 [see below].  
veihll, v. did grind, ground; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B  
vheill, v. did grind or grinded; Num. xi. 8: 
As hie’n pobble magh as haggil ad eh, as vheill 
ad eh ayns mwiljyn, ny vroo ad eh ayns mortar, 
as vroie ad eh ayns pannyn, as ren ad 
berreenyn jeh. And the people went about, and 
gathered it, and ground it in mills, or beat it in a 
mortar, and baked it in pans, and made cakes 
of it. B 
blieh, v. grinding.  
er ny vhlieh, v. hath, &c., been ground; 
Isaiah xxviii. 28: Ta arroo-arran er ny vhlieh, 
nagh bee eh dy kinjagh bwoalley, ny brishey eh 
lesh queeyll e chart, ny broo eh lesh e chabbil. 
Bread corn is bruised; because he will not ever 
be threshing it, nor break it with the wheel of his 
cart, nor bruise it with his horsemen. B 
beihllt or beihlt, ground; 85. 
s’beihlt, a. how ground. B 
ro veihlt, a. too ground. B  
beihlleyder or beihllinder, s. m. a grinder; 
pl. -yn. 
yn veihlleyder, s. the grinder. B  
clagh-bliehmeayn, s. a grindstone.  
beinn, s. m. peak, pinnacle, summit; pl. -yn.  
yn veinn, s. the pinnacle. B 
beisht, s. m. a brute; pl. -yn. 
yn veisht, s. the brute, the beast. B  
nyn meisht, s. your, &c. brute; pl. -yn.  
beishtyn, s. f. pl. virmin; the tooth-ache, 
from a supposition that the pain is 
occasioned by animalculae which breed in 
the teeth. 
e veishtyn, s. his tooth ache or vermin. B 
beishtagh, a. brutish, brutal.  
s’beishtagh, a. how beastly or brutal. B 
s’beishtee, a. id., comp. and sup. B 
ro veishtagh, a. too brutish or beastly. B 
beishteig s. f. a reptile; pl. -yn.  
yn veishteig, s. the reptile or worm. B  
yn veishteig loauee, s. the palmer worm. B 
yn veishteig vergagh, s. the canker worm. 
B 
ben, s. f. a woman, a wife.  
yn ven, s. the woman, the wife. B  
nyn men, s. your, &c. wife or woman. B 
ben-aaishnee, s. f. a female fortune teller.  
ben-aeg, s. f. a young woman.  
shenn-ven-aeg, s. f. an old maid. 
ben-ainshtyr, s. f. a mistress.  
ben-austeyr, s. f. a nun. Perhaps the 
Nunnery near Douglas derives its name 
from this word.  
ben-chee, s. f. a woman that gives suck.  
ben-chleuin, s. f. a son’s wife, daughter-in-
law.  
ben-ghoal, s. f. a blind woman.  
ben-jee, s. f. a goddess; “yn ven jee,” Acts, 
xix. 37: Son ta shiu er chur lhieu kionfenish ny 
deiney shoh, nagh vel edyr roosteyryn dy 
hiambyllyn, ny foast er loayrt goan mollaghtagh 
noi yn ven-jee eu. For ye have brought hither 
these men, which are neither robbers of 
churches, nor yet blasphemers of your 
goddess.  
ben-oainjyr or ben-oainjyragh, s. f. a 
harlot, a concubine.  
ben-oast s. f. the land-lady of a public 
house or inn.  
ben-phoosee, s. f. a bride.  
ben-phoost, s. f. a married woman, a wife.  
ben-reaylt or ben-freaylt, s. f. a midwife, a 
woman to clear or disentangle; from dy 
chur reaghey: or if from freaylt, a woman 
kept for the purpose.  
ben-rein, s. f. a queen, king’s wife.  
ben-seyr, s. f. a gentlewoman.  
ben-thie, s. f. the woman of the house.  
ben-treoghe, s. f. a widow; pl. see mraane.  
38 
B 
 
ben-vanshey, s. f. a woman who attends a 
wedding.  
ben-varrey, s. f. a mermaid.  
ben-vooinjerey, s. f. a kinswoman.  
my ven-heshey, s. my wife; Job, xix. 17: Ta 
m’ennal dwoaiagh da my ven-heshey hene, ga 
dy ghuee mee urree er graih chloan my chorp 
hene. My breath is strange to my wife, though I 
intreated for the children’s sake of mine own 
body; all those words compounded with 
ben, (a woman or wife) might be here 
inserted, but the reader may refer to ben, 
and change them to ven, as required. B  
far-ven, s. f. The far in this word is taken 
as a corruption of fer; an amazon, a virago, 
a woman of masculine appearance, or one 
who is master of her husband. The far, 
taken as false, will be one who is false to 
her wedded husband, one whom a man has 
besides his wife; pl. mraane-fir. 
jeelt ben, a woman’s saddle. 
 
mraane, s. pl. women, wives.  
 mreih, a. d. of women. 
çhengey-ny-mraane. See cron-craaee. 
[‘aspen tree’] 
e vraane, s. his women, or wives. M 
mraane treoghe, s. pl. widows.  
mraane jee, s. pl. goddesses.  
mraane sharvaant, s. pl. maidservants. 
See also inneenyn veyl. 
benn, v. touch; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. Job. 
ii. 5: Agh sheeyn magh dty laue nish, as benn 
rish y chraue as yn eill echey, as nee eh 
d’oltooaney gys dty eddin. But put forth thine 
hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, 
and he will curse thee to thy face.  
venn, v. did touch or touched; -agh; -in 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B  
cre vennagh rish, v. what would befall 
him, what would touch him severely. B 
bentyn, v. 
er ventyn, v. hath touched or meddled with. 
B 
bentyn, adv. touching, respecting, 
appertaining, concerning, connected with.  
benneyder, s. m. a toucher; pl. -yn.  
bennalt, v. wafting, fluttering, fanning, 
moving backwards and forwards in the 
wind. 
dy vennalt, v. to waft the wind or air. B 
beoyn, s. m. tendency, drift, instinct. Ta 
beoyn er yn ushtey dy roi lesh y ninshley. 
[Water has a tendency to flow downwards.] 
berçhagh, a. rich; Prov. “Ta ynsagh coamrey 
stoamey yn dooinney berçhagh, as t’eh 
berçhys y dooinney boght.” [Learning is 
the stately clothing of the rich man, and the 
riches of the poor man.]; s. m. a rich 
person.  
s’berçhagh, a. how rich, &c. B 
s’berçhee, a. id., comp. and sup. B 
feer verçhagh, a. very rich. B 
yn verçhagh, s. the rich one. B 
berçhee, s. pl. rich people. 
berçhagh, v. enrich.  
berçhid, s. m. richness.  
yn verçhid, s. the richness. B 
berçhys, s. f. riches.  
yn verçhys, s. the riches. B 
nyn merçhys, s. your, &c. riches. B  
berr, v. overtake; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
verr, v. did overtake or overtook; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B  
berraght or berraghtyn, v. overtaking.  
bertyn, v. See berraght.  
er verraght or verraghtyn, v. hath, &c., 
overtaken. B  
ro verrit, a. too overtaken. B  
berreyder, s. m. an overtaker.  
yn verreyder, s. the overtaker. B 
berreen, s. f. a cake, a clapt cake; pl. -yn.  
yn verreen or verrin, s. the clapt cake. B 
soddag-verreen or soddag-verrin, s. m. a 
thick clapped cake; a cake generally 
understood as the last of a baking, and left 
longer on the griddle to harden; 1 Kings, 
xvii. 13: …agh jean dooys hoshiaght soddag 
berreen, as cur lhiat hym eh, as eisht jean er 
dty hon hene, as son dty vac. …but make me 
thereof a little cake first, and bring it unto me, 
and after make for thee and for thy son. 
39 
B 
 
berreman, s. m. a neck collar; pl. -yn. This 
word no doubt ought to be spelled 
berremwing or berrequing.  
yn verreman, s. the neck collar. B 
berrish, s. f. a berry; pl. -yn.  
yn verrish, s. the berry or grape. B 
Bessee, s. f. Elizabeth, Betty.  
beysagh, a. compliant, gentle, tame.  
s’beasagh or s’beysagh, a. how 
submissive. B 
s’beasee, a. id., comp. and sup. B 
bher, s. m. a spit to roast meat.  
e vher, s. his spit or roaster. B 
bhir, s. pl. spits, the pl. of bher and of 
baair.  
nyn mhir, s. your, &c. spits. B 
bhittag, s. m. milk for churning.  
yn vhittag, s. the milk for churning. B 
nyn mhittag, s. your, &c. milk for 
churning. B 
bhow, s. m. a bow to shoot with; pl. -ghyn.  
e vhow, s. his bow to shoot with. [B] 
nyn mhow, s. your, &c. bow. B 
bhow-ghorree, s. m. the galaxy or milky-
way.  
bhow, s. m. the prow of a ship or vessel; pl. 
-ghyn.  
e vhow, s. his prow. B 
bhullught or booaliught, s. f. the herb 
mayflower.  
yn vhullught, s. the may flower. B 
bhurkin, s. m. a bodkin; pl. -yn.  
buirkin, s. m. a bodkin.  
yn vhurkan, s. the bodkin. B 
bhurtag, s. f. a blunt knife or tool; pl. -yn.  
yn vhurtag, s. the blunt knife. B 
yn vurtag, s. the blunt knife. B 
nyn murtag, s. your, &c. blunt knife. B 
bhurtagh, v. 
dy vurtagh, v. to fumble, to work with a 
poor or blunt tool. M 
er vurtaghey, v. hath, &c. fumbled or 
wrought in a bungling manner. M  
bhut, s. m. a mark to shoot at, pl. -yn. 
bhut, s. m. a prop or something to stand 
against to support, a bulwark, pl. -yn.  
yn vutt, s. the prop or buttress. B 
nyn mhut, s. your, &c. prop or support. B  
bhuttoor, s. m. a buttress, a pillar; pl. -yn.  
bhuttag, s. f. shorter furrows than other parts 
of the field; a gusset; pl. -yn.  
yn vhuttag, s. the gusset or goar in 
ploughing. B 
nyn muttag, your, &c. buttag. B 
bial, a. subject; Psl. cxlviii. (metre): E ennym 
smoo gloyroil /Ta toilchin moylley voue. /King 
foddey’n theihll /Ta bial da, /e ghloyr dy bra 
/T’erskyn dagh reill. [His most glorious name 
deserves praise from them. The far ends of the 
earth obey him; His glory for ever is above 
every dominion. MWW] 
feer vial, s. very subjective. B  
biallagh, a. obedient, submissive; s. m. a 
submissive person; pl. 71 [change -agh to 
-ee].  
s’biallagh, a. how obedient, &c. B 
s’biallee, a. id., comp. and sup. B 
ro viallagh, a. too obedient or submissive. 
B 
mee[-]viallagh, a. disobedient; s. m. a 
disobedient person; pl. 71 [change -agh to 
-ee]. 
biallys, s. m. obedience, submission.  
e viallys, s. his obedience or submission. B 
nyn miallys, s. your, &c. subjection, 
obedience. 
bibbernee, v. shivering, shuddering with cold 
or illness.  
bieau, a. quick, swift, speedy.  
s’bieau, a. how swift or speedy, comp. & 
sup. B 
feer vieau, a. very swift or speedy. B 
bieauid, s. m. quickness, speed.  
e vieauid, s. his swiftness or speed. B 
nyn mieauid, s. your, &c. speed, &c. B 
billey, s. m. a tree; pl. 70 [biljyn].  
yn villey, s. the tree. B 
nyn milley, s. your, &c. tree. B 
e viljyn, s. his trees. B 
nyn miljyn, s. your, &c. trees. B 
billey-bwee or buigh, s. m. bay tree or 
40 
B 
 
laurel.  
billagh, a. d. of trees, full of trees.  
s’billagh, a. how grown over with trees. B 
s’billee a. id., comp. and sup. B 
feer villagh, a. very full of trees. B 
bine, s. m. a drop; pl. -yn.  
yn vine, s. the drop. B 
nyn mine, s. your, &c. drop. B  
bing, a. shrill; -ey, a. pl. shrill.  
s’bing, a. how shrill, how melodious. B 
s’bingey, a. id., comp. and sup. B 
ro ving, a. too shrill. B 
collan-bing, s. m. a sound in the ear as of a 
bell. 
guilley[-]bing, s. m. the herb cockshead 
medic. 
bingys, s. f. music, harmony.  
e vingys, s. his music. B 
nyn mingys, s. your, &c. music.  
bing, s. f. a jury; pl. -aghyn.  
yn ving, s. the jury. B 
nyn ming, s. your, &c. jury. B 
bingagh, a. d. of a jury; as, dooinney 
bingagh (a juryman).  
bingey, a. d. of a jury; as, deiney bingey 
(jurymen).  
s’bingagh, a. how much for juries. B 
bink, s. f. a bench; base; pl. -yn; 2 Kings, xxv. 
13: As ny pillaryn prashey va ayns thie yn 
Chiarn, as ny binkyn, as y faarkey prashey 
ayns thie yn Chiarn, vrish ny Caldeeyn ayns 
peeshyn, as hug ad lhieu yn phrash gys 
Babylon. And the pillars of brass that were in 
the house of the Lord, and the bases, and the 
brasen sea that was in the house of the Lord, 
did the Chaldees break in pieces, and carried 
the brass of them to Babylon. 
yn vink, s. the bench. B 
binn, s. pl. the corners of a sheet or 
handkerchief, points; Acts, xi. 5: Va mish ec 
padjer ayns ard-valley Joppa; as myr va mee 
my-neealloo, honnick mee ayns ashlish, saagh 
dy row cheet neose myr dy beagh eh brelleein 
vooar, lhiggit neose veih niau er ny kiare binn; 
as haink eh er-gerrey dou. I was in the city of 
Joppa praying: and in a trance I saw a vision, A 
certain vessel descend, as it had been a great 
sheet, let down from heaven by four corners; 
and it came even to me.  
e vinn, s. his corners. B 
binnid, s. f. a rennet; pl. -yn.  
yn vinnid, s. the rennet. B 
binshey, a. d. of a rennet.  
lus ny binjey, s. f. dropwort. 
lus ny binjey lheeanagh, s. f. meadow 
trefoil. 
lus ny binjey mooar, s. f. crudwort. 
binjaghey, v. crudling, or making in small 
cruds.  
er vinjaghey, v. hath, &c., curdled; Job, x. 
10: Nagh vel oo er my heeley myr bainney, as 
er my vinjaghey myr groo? Hast thou not 
poured me out as milk, and curdled me like 
cheese? B 
binjean, s. f. milk turned to crud with 
rennet, crudled in haste with rennet.  
yn vinjean, s. the curds and whey, the 
curded milk. B  
bio, v. live; as, bio chabbyl as yiow bee; a. 
alive, animated.  
s’bio, a. how much alive; choud as s’bio 
mee (as long as I live). Though I think it 
could be expressed as well, choud as bee’m 
bio. B 
feer vio, a. very much alive. B  
argid-bio, s. m. quicksilver, mercury. 
ushtey-bio, s. m. the first rising of the 
spring tide after a neap. 
anvio, a. inanimate. 
brey-bio, a. viviparous. 
bioee, s. pl. the living. 
bioghee, v. will or shall give life.  
bioee, v. enliven.  
vioee, v. did quicken or vivify. B  
aa-vioee or aa-vioghee, v. revive, quicken, 
enliven. 
bioghey, v. enlivening, quickening. 
dy vioghey, v. to quicken or animate, to 
enliven or vivify. B 
dy aa-vioghey, v. to revive, to quicken. 
bioghey-roayrt, s. m. the first rising of the 
spring tide after a neap.  
 
bioit, 85. enlivened, quickened.  
bio-al or bio-oil, adv. lively.  
41 
B 
 
s’bio-oil or s’bio-al, a. how lively; comp. 
and sup. B  
bioid, s. m. liveliness.  
bioys, s. f. life, existence.  
dty vioys, s. thy life. Prov. “Lesh y vioys 
shegin jannoo.” [You must make do with 
the life you have. MWW] B  
nyn mioys, s. your, &c. life; pl. -yn. B 
bioyr, a. brisk, smart. 
s’bioyr, a. how brisk or smart. B 
s’bioyrey, a. id., comp. and sup. B 
feer vioyr, a. very brisk. B 
vioyrey, a. pl. brisk, smart. B 
bioyr, v. brisk; -agh, 77; -aghey, 82; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
bioyree, v. enliven, make brisk.  
vioyr* or vioyree, v. did make brisk; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B 
bioyraghey, v. 
dy vioyraghey, v. to make brisk. B  
bioyrit 
ro vioyrit, a. made too brisk. B 
bioyrid, s. m. briskness.  
e vioyrid, s. his briskness. B 
biol, s. f. a fiddle.  
yn viol, s. the violin or fiddle. B 
birr, v. 
virr* or virree, v. did sharpen the point; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94.B  
birraghey, v. 
dy virraghey, v. to sharpen the point. B 
birrag, s. f. a sharp pointed tooth, or any 
thing sharp pointed, an eye tooth; pl. -yn.  
yn vir[r]ag, s. the eye tooth. B 
birragh, a. pointed, sharp pointed.  
s’birragh or s’byrragh, a. how sharp 
pointed. B 
s’birree, a. id., comp. and sup. B 
feer virragh, a. very sharp pointed. B 
bish or bishee, v. increase, multiply, enlarge; 
-agh, 77; -aghey, 82; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 
86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
bishee. This word is used for the verb bish, 
increase, augment, establish; Psl. xc. 17: As 
dy row Ard-ooashley gloyroil y Chiarn yn Jee 
ain orrin: bishee uss obbyr nyn laueyn orrin, O 
bishee uss ny ta shin dy ghoaill ayns laue. And 
the glorious majesty of the Lord our God be 
upon us: prosper thou the work of our hands 
upon us, O prosper thou our handywork.  
vish* or vishee, v. did increase, multiply, 
or prosper; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 
94. B  
dy vishagh or vishaghey, v. to increase, to 
augment, &c. B 
nyn mishagh or mishaghey, v. your, &c. 
increasing or multiplying. B  
bishit, 85. augmented, multiplied. 
bisheyder, s. m. an increaser, a multiplier; 
pl. -yn.  
bitçhey, s. f. a bitch; pl. 69 [change -ey to 
-yn].  
yn vitçhey, s. the bitch. B 
nyn mitçhey, s. your, &c. bitch. B 
bite, s. m. wick; bait to fish; pl. -yn. 
yn vite, s. the wick; the bait. B 
nyn mite, s. your, &c. bait, wick. B  
bite, v. [‘bait’] -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -ey, 82; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -it, 85; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
blaa, s. m. bloom, flower, blossom; pl. -ghyn.  
yn vlaa, s. the bloom, blossom, or flower. B 
nyn mlaa, s. your, &c. bloom. B 
far-vlaa, s. m. an artificial flower. 
my vlaa, a. in flower. 
blaaghee, v. will, &c. id.  
blaaghys, v. shall or will, &c. id.  
blaaghagh, v. would, &c. bud, blossom, or 
flower.  
blaaghey, v. blossoming, flowering, 
budding, flourishing; Phil. iv. 10: Agh ghow 
mee boggey mooar ayns y Chiarn, nish ec y 
jerrey dy vel y chiarail euish er my hon er 
vlaaghey reesht. But I rejoiced in the Lord 
greatly, that now at the last your care of me 
hath flourished again.  
dy vlaaghey, v. to blossom or flower. B  
blaaghit, 85. flowered, blossomed.  
ro vlaaghit, a. too blossomed, &c. B  
blaa-agh 
s’blaaagh or s’blaagh, a. how flowery or 
full of flowers. B  
s’blaaee, id., comp. and sup. B 
blaashag<h>-buigh, s. f. the wild or field 
marygold.  
42 
B 
 
yn vlaashag-wuigh, s. the wild or field 
marygold. B 
blaa-hiass, s. m. lukewarmth.  
blake, v. gaze, gape; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -ey, 
82; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88. 
vlaak or vlake, v. did gaze or gape; -agh; 
-ey; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B 
nyn mlakey, v. your, &c. gazing. B  
blakeyder, s. m. a gazer, a gaper. [pl. -yn.] 
yn vlakeyder, s. the gazer. B 
blass or blayst, s. m. taste, savour, flavour; pl. 
-yn. 
yn vlass or vlayst, s. the taste or savour. B 
nyn mlayst, s. your, &c. taste. B 
dyn-blayst, a. insipid, without taste. 
blass or blayst, v. -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -it, 85; -yn, 86; -ys, 87; -ys, 88.  
vlayst, v. did taste; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. B 
blasstey or blasstyn, v. tasteth, tasting.  
dy vlaystyn, v. to taste. B 
blasstal, a. tasteful, savoury, palatable.  
s’blastal, a. how savory, tasty, sippid, 
comp. and sup. B 
feer vlaystal, a. very tasteful or sippid. B  
lus-blaystal, s. f. savory. 
neu-vlaystal, a. unsavory, insipid. 
blean, s. f. flank, groin; Lev. iii. 15; pl. -yn. 
As yn daa aarey, as yn eeh t’orroo, shen ny ta 
liorish ny bleanyn, as y skairt erskyn yn aane, 
marish ny aaraghyn, shen nee eh y ghoaill 
ersooyl. And the two kidneys, and the fat that is 
upon them, which is by the flanks, and the caul 
above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take 
away. 
e vlean, s. his groin or flank. B 
bleayn, s. f. an emerod, a pile; pl. -yn.  
yn vleayn, s. the emerod or pile. B 
bleayst, s. f. a husk, the shell of an egg, any 
covering that is easily shattered; pl. -yn.  
yn vleayst, s. the husk or shell, the cover of 
grains in a pod; the shell of an egg. B  
bleaystagh, a. husky.  
ro vleaystagh, a. too husky. B 
bleb, s. m. a befooled person, a cully, a 
person acting foolishly; pl. -eeyn, -inyn 
[see blebin], or -yn.  
yn vleb, s. the foolish or befooled person. B 
nyn mleb, s. your, &c. befooled person, 
&c. See bleb. B 
blebin or bleban, s. m. one that is a little 
befooled, the dim. of bleb.  
blebinagh, a. foolish, easily made a fool 
of.  
feer vlebbinagh, a. very simple or silly. B  
blebinys, s. m. foolery, folly.  
bleih or bleie, s. m. a halfling; perhaps from 
by-lieh (a thing about as good as half); pl. 
-ghyn.  
yn vleie, s. the halfling: B 
blein, s. f. a year.  
yn vlein, s. the year. B 
nyn mleïn, s. your, &c. year. B 
bleeaney, a. d. of a year, annual.  
çhiass vleeaney, a. the heat of the year. B 
laa-blee[a]ney, s. m. anniversary day. 
bleeantyn, s. pl. years.  
e vleeantyn, s. his years. B 
nyn mleeantyn, s. your, &c. years. B 
blein[-]lheim, s. f. a leap year.  
myleeaney, s. f. this year. 
blennick, s. f. the fat of the belly.  
yn vlennick, s. the belly fat. B 
nyn mlennick, s. your, &c. belly fat. B 
blennick-çholgey, id. A corruption of 
bolgey.  
blest, s. m. blast; pl. -yn; Deut. xxviii. 22: 
Nee’n Chiarn uss y woalley lesh doghan gyn-
lheihys, as lesh y chiassaghey, as lesh att, as 
lesh chiasslostee, as lesh y chliwe, as lesh 
blest, as lesh mergey The Lord shall smite 
thee with a consumption, and with a fever, and 
with an inflammation, and with an extreme 
burning, and with the sword, and with blasting, 
and with mildew. 
yn vless, s. the blast. B 
nyn mlest, s. your, &c. blast. B 
blest keayin, s. m. a sea blast. 
blest, v. blast; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -ys, 88.  
vlest, v. did blast; -agh; -ys, 94. B 
blestal 
dy vlestal, v. to blast. B  
43 
B 
 
blestit 
ro vlestit, a. too blasted. B 
blieaun, v. milk, milking; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88; 
pl. -aghyn, milkings.  
nyn mlieaun, v. your, &c. milking. B 
vlieaun, v. did milk or milked; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B 
bhlit, 85. milked.  
ro vhlit, a. too milked. B 
ro vlieaunit, a. too milked. B  
blieauneyder, s. m. a milker; pl. -yn.  
yn vlieauneyder, s. the milker. B  
nyn mlieauneyder, s. your, &c. milker. B 
blieaunaght, s. m. the milking.  
yn vlieaunagh, s. the milking. B 
nyn mlieaunagh, s. your, &c. milking. B 
bluight, a. milch, giving milch; opposite to 
shast.  
booa vluight, a. a milk cow. B 
bluightagh, s. m. milch cattle.  
yn vluightagh, s. the whole of the milk 
cattle. B 
blob, v. blab, babble. 
bloberaght, v. babbling. 
bloberey, s. m. a babbler. See also 
blaberey.  
yn vlobberey, s. the babbler. B  
nyn mloberey, s. your, &c, babbler. B  
block 
bhlick, s. pl. blocks.  
e vlick, s. his blocks. B 
blockan, s. m. a pollock fish; pl. -yn.  
yn vlockan, s. See blockan. B 
blod, s. m. a blade.  
yn vlod, s. the blade. B 
nyn mlod, s. your, &c. blade. B 
blhuid, s. pl. blades.  
e vlhuid, s. his blades. B 
blouse, s. f. a slovenly woman.  
yn vlouse, s. the blowse. B 
bluckan or bluggan, s. m. a ball; pl. -yn.  
nyn mluggan, s. your, &c. ball. B 
yn vluggan, s. the ball. B  
bluckaney or blugganey, v. forming into a 
ball or round mass.  
dy vlugganey, v. to ball or glomerate. B 
boadagh, s. m. a cod; pl. 71 [change -agh to 
-ee].  
yn voadagh, s. the cod. B  
nyn moadagh, s. your, &c. cod. B 
boadrym, s. f. a greave; pl. -yn; 1 Sam. xvii. 
6: As va boadrymyn prashey er e lurgaghyn, 
as plaityn prashey eddyr e gheayltyn. And he 
had greaves of brass upon his legs, and a 
target of brass between his shoulders.  
e voadrymyn, s. his greaves. B 
boal or boalley, s. m. a wall; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn]. The translators of the 
Scriptures have not in any case used this 
radical, but always voal, for which I cannot 
assign any reason.  
yn voalley, s. the wall. B  
nyn moal or moalley, s. your, &c. wall B 
nyn moallaghyn, s. pl. your, &c. walls. 
far-voalley, s. m. a partition; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn]. 
boall, v. 
voal or voall*, v. did wall; -agh; -in; -ym; 
-ys. B 
boallagh, v. would, &c. wall.  
boallit, 85. walled.  
balley voallit, a. a walled town. B 
boalleyder, s. m. a waller; pl. -yn.  
yn voalleyder, s. the waller. B  
Boaldyn, s. f. May; as laa Boaldyn (May-
day); mee ny Boaldyn (May-month). The 
etymology of this word is not well known; 
some say it is derived from boal (a wall), 
and teine (fire), Irish, in reference to the 
practice of going round the walls or fences 
with fire on the eve of this day; others, that 
it is derived from laa bwoailtçhyn, the day 
cattle or sheep are first put to the fold; 
others, a corruption of blieauntyn, “the 
month of three milkings,” as the Saxons 
called this month.  
yn Voaldyn, s. the May. B 
beeal Voaldy[n] (the entrance into May). 
boand, v. band; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
voand, v. did band; -agh; -in; -ym; -ys, 94. 
B 
boandit 
ro voandit, a. too banded. B 
44 
B 
 
boandey, s. m. a band; pl. 67 [change -ey 
to -aghyn].  
yn voandey, s. the band. B 
nyn moandey, s. your, &c. band. B 
boandyr, s. f. a nurse. 
yn voandyr, s. the nurse. B 
nyn moandyr, s. your, &c. nurse. B 
boandyr kee, a wet nurse. 
boandyr shast, a dry nurse; [pl. -yn] 
boandyr, v. nurse; -agh, 77; -ee, 80, -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
boandyrys, v. nursing.  
dy voandyrys, v. to nurse. B 
nyn moandyrys, v. your, &c. nursing. B 
boandyrit, 85. nursed, nourished.  
ro voandyrit, a. too nursed. B 
boandyrey, s. m. a male nurse.  
boanlagh, s. m. the refuse; 2 Kings, xxiv. 14: 
As hug eh lesh ooilley Jerusalem ersooyl, as 
ooilley ny princeyn, as ooilley ny deiney niartal 
caggee, eer jeih thousaneyn cappee, as ooilley 
ny keirdee, as ny gaauenyn: cha row veg 
faagit, er-lhimmey jeh’n boanlagh s’boghtey 
jeh phobble ny cheerey. And he carried away 
all Jerusalem, and all the princes, and all the 
mighty men of valour, even ten thousand 
captives, and all the craftsmen and smiths: 
none remained, save the poorest sort of the 
people of the land.  
boannoo or bainniu, s. m. a well nursed pig 
after being weaned, a half grown pig; pl. 
-yn.  
yn voannoo, s. the partly reared pig. B 
nyn moannoo, s. your, &c. weaned pig. B 
boarder, s. m. border; pl. -yn.  
nyn moarder, s. your, &c. border. B 
boasteil, v. 
er voasteil, v. hath, &c. boasted. B 
boayl, s. m. a ball to play with; pl. -lyn or 
buill.  
yn voayll, s. the play ball. B 
boayl, s. m. a place; pl. -lyn or buill.  
yn voayll, s. the place. B 
nyn moayl, s. your, &c. place. B 
e vuill, s. his places. This word as well as 
voayllyn, is used for the plural of place. B 
Boayldin. Two vallies in the parish of 
Braddan are so called, no doubt from their 
low situations; as, boayl dowin (a low 
place).  
boayrd, s. m. a table, a board.  
yn voayrd, s. the table, the board. B 
nyn moayrd, s. your, &c. table. B 
buird, s. pl. tables, boards; pl. of boayrd; a. 
d. of a table or tables.  
e vuird, s. his tables, boards, &c. B 
bochil, v. herd; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -yn, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
vochil, v. did herd; -agh; -in; -ym; -ys, 94. 
B  
bochillaght, v. herding.  
dy vochillagh or vochillaghey, v. to herd. 
B 
yn vochillaght, s. the herding. B 
nyn mochillaght, v. your, &c. herding. B 
bochillit, 85. herded. 
ro vochillit, a. too herded. B 
bochilley, s. m. f. a herd or shepherd; pl. 69 
[change -ey to -yn].  
yn vochil or vochilley, s. the herd or 
herdsman. B  
nyn mochil or mochilley, s. your &c. herd. 
B 
bochilley-anmey, s. m. a pastor.  
sporran-y-vochil, s. f. shepherd’s purse, 
mithridate. 
bock s. m. a gelded horse, a gelding. The 
word is also used for bock goar (a he goat), 
from buck goat.  
yn vock, the gelding. B 
nyn mock, s. your, &c. gelding. B 
buick, s. pl. geldings, gelded horses.  
e vuick, s. his geldings. B 
e wuick, s. 42. his geldings. B 
nyn muick, s. your geldings. B 
bock-glass, s. m. the greyhound fish.  
Bock-Yuan-Fannee, s. m. the horse of one 
John, who had flayed it, and who 
afterwards was obliged to travel on foot; 
hence a man’s own legs and feet, or his 
stick, are so termed.  
bodjal, s. m. a cloud; pl. -yn.  
yn vodjal, s. the cloud. B 
nyn modjal, s. your, &c. cloud. B 
45 
B 
 
bodjalagh, a. cloudy; a. d. of a cloud or 
clouds.  
feer vodjallagh, a. very cloudy. B 
bodjaley, v. gathering clouds.  
er vodjaley, v. hath, &c. gathered clouds. B  
neu-vodjalit, a. unclouded. 
bog, a. soft, moist.  
s’bog, a. how soft or moist. B 
s’buiggey, a. the comparative and 
superlative of bog and s’bog. B 
ro vog, a. too soft or moist. B 
bog-unnish. s. f. the herb osmondroyal or 
water-fern.  
bogg, v. soften; -agh, 77; -aghey, 82; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88.  
my vog or vogg, v. if would soften [if 
softened]; -agh; -in; -ym; -ys. B  
dy voggaghey, v. to soften or moisten. B 
buiggys, s. f. softness, moisture.  
dy wuiggys, s. of moisture. B 
boggey, s. m. joy, gladness.  
dy voggey, s. of joy or gladness. B 
nyn moggey, s. your, &c. joy. B 
boggeysagh, a. rejoicing, gladdening.  
dy voggeysagh, v. to rejoice, to triumph, to 
gladden. This word is seldom used; the 
phrase, dy goaill boggey, or dy ve gennal, 
&c. having superseded it. B  
boggoil, a. joyous, glad, merry.  
s’boggoil, a. how joyous or joyful, comp. 
& sup. 
ro voggoil, a. too joyous. B 
boggys, s. m. brag, boast; Rom. iii. 27: Cre vel 
boggys eisht? te giarit magh. Liorish cre’n 
leigh? nee jeh obbraghyn? Cha nee: agh liorish 
y leigh dy chredjue. Where is boasting then? It 
is excluded. By what law? of works? Nay: but 
by the law of faith.  
boggyssagh, v. boasting. 
dy voggyssagh, v. to boast. B 
s. m. a boaster; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]; 
Rom. i. 30: Cooylchasseydee, noidyn Yee, 
roonee, moyrnee, boggyssee, gientyn reddyn 
olk, mee-viallee da ayraghyn as moiraghyn, 
Backbiters, haters of God, despiteful, proud, 
boasters, inventors of evil things, disobedient to 
parents.  
yn voggyssagh, s. the boaster; B 
boghan-dho, s. f. the herb burdock. [See 
bossan-dhoa.] 
boghlane, s. m. a bank, an old hedge; pl. -yn.  
yn vog[h]lane, s. the bank. B 
nyn moghlane, s. your, &c. bank. B 
boghlanagh, a. full of banks.  
feer voghlanagh, a. very full of banks. B 
buncleighan. See boghlane.  
boght, a. poor, needy, indigent; boght dy-
liooar, poor enough; s. m. a poor person, a 
pauper; pl. -yn. Prov. “Boght, boght dy 
bragh.” [Poor, poor for ever.] 
s’boght, a. how poor or mean. B 
s’boghtey, a. id., comp. and sup. B 
feer voght, a. very poor. B 
yn voght, s. the poor body. B 
nyn moght, s. your, &c. poor person. B 
dy boght, adv. poorly, indigently.  
neu-voght, a. not poor. 
n’oght, a. (a contraction of neu-voght) not 
poor; lit. unpoor; as in the phrase boght as 
n’oght (poor and unpoor).  
boghtynid, s. m. poverty, poorness.  
e voghtynid, s. his poverty. B  
nyn moghtynid, s. your, &c. poverty. B 
boiddagh, s. m. a stingy person, a churl; pl. 
71 [change -agh to -ee].  
boir, v. trouble, disturb, bother; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
voir, v. did disturb or trouble; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B 
woir, v. 42. did trouble or disturb, did 
harass; -agh; -ee, -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 
94. See also voir. B 
dy voiraghey or voirey, v. to disturb or 
trouble. B 
ro voirit, a. too disturbed, &c. B  
boirey, s. m. disturbance, trouble, strife. pl. 
67 [change -ey to -aghyn].  
yn voirey, s. the disturbance or trouble; or 
bother, a low English word. B 
e woirey, s. 42. his trouble or disturbance. 
B 
nyn moirey, s. your, &c. disturbance, &c. 
46 
B 
 
B 
boiragh, a. troublesome, tumultuous.  
s’boirragh, a. how troublesome, &c. B 
s’boirree, a. id., comp. and sup. B 
feer voiragh, a. very troublesome, &c. B  
ro woiragh, a. 42. too troublesome, &c. B 
boireyder 
yn voireyder, s. the troubler or disturber. B 
yn woireyder, s. 42. the troubler or 
disturb[er]. B  
nyn moireyder, s. your, &c. disturber, &c. 
B 
boirane, s. m. a clamorous fellow.  
yn woirane, s. 42. the troublesome one. B 
boiraneagh, a. brawling or turbulent.  
boiranys, s. m. balderdash, brawl, bother, 
troublesomeness, tumult, the effects of 
being wrong in the head.  
e woi[r]anys, s. 42. his trouble, harassing. 
B 
boiteil 
yn voiteil or voteil, s. the bottle. B 
bolg, s. m. the belly; pl. 74 [builg. See 
below].  
yn volg, s. the belly. B  
nyn molg, s. your, &c. belly. B 
bolgagh, a. d. of the belly.  
volgagh, a. d. of the belly. B 
bolgey, a. d. of the belly or bellies.  
builg, s. pl. bellies; pl. of bolg.  
e vuilg, s. his bellies. B 
e wuilg. s. 42. his bellies. B 
builg-sheidee, s. f. bellows; Jer. vi. 29: Ta 
ny builg-sheidee losht, ta’n leoie er n’gholl 
naardey ’syn aile; ta’n lheeider lheïe ayns 
fardail; son cha vel ny meechrauee er ny 
ghaartlian ass. The bellows are burned, the 
lead is consumed of the fire; the founder 
melteth in vain: for the wicked are not plucked 
away.  
e vuilg-sheidee, s. his bellows. B 
mooar-volgagh, a. big bellied. 
streean-volgagh, s. f. a martingale. 
bolgane, s. f. the calf of the leg; pl. -yn.  
yn volgane, s. the belly or calf of the leg. B  
nyn molgane, s. your, &c. calf of leg. B 
 
bolg, v. roast, or raise blisters by fire; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88.  
volg, v. did roast or blister; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B 
bolgey, v. roasting or blistering.  
er volgey, v. hath, &c. roasted, &c. B 
bolgit, 85. roasted.  
ro volgit, a. too roasted, &c. B 
bolgeyder s. m. a roaster; pl. -yn.  
yn volgeyder, s. the roaster or parcher. B 
bolgagh, a. d. of blisters.  
bolgan, s. m. a bubble, a blister; pl. -yn.  
yn volgan, s. the bubble or little belly. B 
bolgum or bolgym, s. m. a mouth full of 
liquid; a corruption of beeal-gum; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee; but that does not 
belong here].  
yn volgum, s. the mouthful. B  
nyn molgum, s. your, &c. mouthful. B  
bollag, s. f. a skull; pl. -yn.  
nyn mollag, s. your, &c. skull. B 
bollagh, a. clean bare, altogether brought.  
s’bollagh, a. how quite bare, how entirely 
or wholly bare. B 
s’bollee, a. id., comp. and sup. B 
dy bollagh, adv. entirely, utterly.  
ro vollagh, a. too bare or too barely 
brought or gathered. This and preceding 
word, [ro vollagh, a. too rough.] though 
spelled alike, are nearly in direct 
opposition. B 
bollan, s. f. the fish old wife, or rock fish; pl. 
-yn.  
yn vollan, s. the old wife fish. B 
nyn mollan, s. your, &c. rock-fish. B 
bolley, s. m. a boll, a measure of six bushels, 
or twenty-four kishens of barley and oats, 
four bushels or sixteen kishens of wheat, 
rye, pease, beans, and potatoes; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn].  
yn volley, s. the boll. B 
bolvane, s. m. a numskull, a blockhead; pl. 
-yn.  
yn volvane, s. the stupid person, the 
dolthead, the person dull of apprehension. 
B  
nyn molvane, s. your, &c. dolthead. B 
47 
B 
 
bolvaneagh, a. doltish, mopish, dull of 
apprehension, stupid.  
s’bolvanagh, a. how stupid or dull of 
apprehension. B 
s’bolvanee, a. id., comp. and sup. B 
feer volvanagh, a. very stupid, &c., 
foolish; Job, xxx. 8: V’ad cloan volvaneagh, 
cloan chercheenee, v’ad ny s’melley na joan ny 
hooirrey. They were children of fools, yea, 
children of base men: they were viler than the 
earth. B  
bolvaneys, s. m. stupefaction, stupidity.  
e volvaneys, s. his stupidity or dullness of 
apprehension. B  
nyn molvanys, s. your, &c. doltishness. B 
bondagh, s. m. one in bondage; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]; 2 Kings, iv. 1: …as 
ta’n eeasyder er jeet dy ghoaill da hene my 
ghaa vac dy ve e harvaantyn bondee. …and 
the creditor is come to take unto him my two 
sons to be bondmen.  
bondiaght, s. m. bondage; pl. -yn.  
bondeeys 
dy vondiaght or vondeeys, s. of bondage. 
B 
nyn mondiaght, s. your, &c. bondage. B 
bonkan, s. m. a boor, a bumpkin, a rustic, a 
mountaineer, a clown; pl. -yn.  
yn vonkan, s. the bumpkin or boor. B 
nyn monkan, s. your, &c. boor, &c. B 
bonkanagh 
ro vonkanagh, a. too boorish, &c. B 
bonkanys 
e vonkanys, s. his boorishness, &c. B 
bonnad, s. m. a bonnet; pl. -yn.  
yn vonnad, s. the bonnet. B 
Bonnee or Bonny, s. f. a general name for an 
old mare.  
yn vonnee, s. the old mare. B 
booa, s. f. a cow. Heb. bakar; pl. -ghyn.  
yn vooa, s. the cow. B  
yn wooa, s. 42. the cow. See also vooa. B 
yn voa, s. the cow; Job, xxi. 10: Ta’n tarroo 
oc trean, as cha vel eh failleil; ta’n voa oc breh, 
as cha vel ee tilgey e lheiy. Their bull 
gendereth, and faileth not; their cow calveth, 
and casteth not her calf. See also booa. B 
nyn mooa, s. your, &c. cow. B  
ba or baa, a. d. of a cow or cows; as 
bainney baa (cow’s milk); [pl. ‘cows’] 
1 Sam. vi. 7: Nish er-y-fa shen, jean-jee cart 
noa, as gow-jee daa vooa vluight nagh row 
rieau fo’n whing, as cur-jee ny baa fo’n chart, 
as cur-jee lhieu ny lheiyee thie voue. Now 
therefore make a new cart, and take two milch 
kine, on which there hath come no yoke, and 
tie the kine to the cart, and bring their calves 
home from them. 
meil-baa, s. f. cowslip, preagle, pollianther. 
yn vaa, s. the cow or cattle. B  
nyn maa, s. your, &c. cows. B 
booa-ghoayn, s. f. the herb fumatory.  
boodee, adv. jointly; in partnership.  
ro voodee, a. too much in partnership. B 
boodeeys, s. m. partnership; pl. -syn.  
e voodeeys, s. his partnership. B  
boogh, s. m. b[u]lge, protuberance; pl. -yn. 2 
Chron. iv. 12: Ta shen, yn daa phillar, as ny 
booghyn, as ny atteeyn v’er kione y daa 
phillar, as yn daa chassey dy coodaghey’n daa 
cheeill ny atteeyn v’er kione ny pillaryn. To wit, 
the two pillars, and the pommels, and the 
chapiters which were on the top of the two 
pillars, and the two wreaths to cover the two 
pommels of the chapiters which were on the 
top of the pillars.  
yn voogh, s. the b[u]lge. B 
booiagh, a. willing, content, satisfied. See 
bwooiagh, as it ought to be written: “Cha 
vel eh laccal gerjagh ta goaill soylley jeh 
aigney booiagh.” [He lacks not comfort 
who enjoys a contented mind.] 
bwooiagh, a. willing, pleased with; Mal. i. 
8: …cheb nish gys dty chiannoort eh, bee 
eshyn bwooiagh jeed, ny soiaghey jeh dty 
phersoon? …offer it now unto thy governor; will 
he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person? 
ro vooiagh, a. too willing. B 
feer wooiagh, a. 42. very willing or 
pleased. B 
s’booiagh, a. how glad, or willing, how 
well pleased. Prov. “S’booiagh yn voght er 
yn veggan.” [The poor are contented with 
little.] B 
neu-wooiagh, a. unwilling, unpleased. 
48 
B 
 
s’booiee, a. id., comp. and sup. B 
spooie, a. See s’booie. 
aigney-booiagh, s. m. contentment. 
booid 
e wooid or wooi-id, s. 42. his willingness. 
B  
booiys, v. 
dy wooiys, v. 42. to please ; 2 Chron. x. 7: 
As loayr ad rish, gra, My vees oo dooie da’n 
pobble shoh, as ad y wooiys, as glare vie dy 
chur daue, bee ad dty harvaantyn son dy 
bragh. And they spake unto him, saying, If thou 
be kind to this people, and please them, and 
speak good words to them, they will be thy 
servants for ever. See also Matrimony. B 
booie 
vooie, a. See laare vooie. B  
laare-vooie, s. the threshing or winnowing 
floor. 
booise, s. m. thanks, praise.  
e vooise, s. his thanks. B 
nyn mooise, s. your, &c. thanks. B 
e vooiys, s. his gratitude. B 
nyn mooiys, s. your, &c. gratitude. B  
neu-vooiys, s. f. ingratitude. 
beggan-ny-booise, little thanks. 
kianglt booise, bound in thanks or bound 
to thanks. 
e hoyrt-booise, s. his giving of thanks. T 
booisal, a. thankful, grateful.  
feer vooisal, a. very thankful or grateful. B  
neu-vooisal, a. unthankful. 
neu-wooisal, a. unthankful. See also neu-
vooisal. 
ennaghtyn-booisal, s. m. grateful feeling, 
gratitude. 
booit, s. m. boot; chance.  
boorey, s. m. a beach; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
yn voorey, s. the beach. B  
nyn moorey, s. your, &c. beach; pl. 67. B 
boots 
yn voots, s. the boot. B 
bossan, s. m. wort, weed, an herb; pl. -yn.  
yn vossan, s. the wort. B 
nyn mossan, s. your, &c. herb. B 
bossan-ardnieu, s. f. bistort, snakeweed.  
bossan-argid, s. m. tansy, silverweed.  
bossan-dhoa, or bogandho, s. m. clotbur, 
burdock, or coppy-major.  
bossan-fealoin, s. f. mugwort.  
bossan-feeackle, s. f. dog’s tooth, violet.  
bossan-gennish, s. f. barren wort.  
bossan-ingey, s. m. nailwort, or witlow.  
bossan-jargan, s. m. fleawort.  
bossan-mollagh, s. m. a species of ragwort.  
bossan-pepyragh, s. m. pepperwort, 
dittander.  
bossan-pheddyr, s. m. peter’s wort.  
bossan-tessen, s. m. crosswort.  
bossan-vreeshey, s. f. buckshorn.  
bouin, s. f. bodice, stays, the waist; pl. -yn.  
yn vouin, s. the stays or bodice. B  
bouinagh, s. m. a person, beast, or garment 
having a long waist.  
yn vouinagh, s. the long waist. B 
boult, s. 
yn voult, s. the bolt. B 
e vhoult, s. his bolt. B 
boltee 
ushag voltee, s. f. the wagtail. 
boult, v. 
voult, v. did bolt; -agh; -in; -ym; -ys, 94 B 
boultal, v.  
dy voultal, v. to bolt. B  
ro voultit, a. too bolted. B 
bouyr, a. deaf. 
s’bouyr, a. how deaf. B 
s’bouyrey, a. deafer, deafest. B 
ro vouyr, a. too deaf. B 
ny beuyr, s. pl. the deaf; the pl. of bouyr.  
e veuyr, s. his deaf. B 
bouyrey, a. pl. deaf.  
mraane vouyrey, a. pl. deaf women. B 
bouyraghey, v. deafening; -agh, 77; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
dy vouyragh, v. to deafen. B 
er vouyraghey, v. hath, &c., deafened. B  
bouyrit, 85. deafened.  
ro vouyrit, a. too deafened. B 
yn vouyreyder, s. the deafener. B 
bouyrid, s. m. deafness.  
e veuyrid, s. his deafness. B 
nyn mouyrid, s. your, &c. deafness. B 
bouyran, s. m. a person a little deaf; pl. 
49 
B 
 
-yn.  
yn vouyran or vouran, s. the person a little 
deaf, the deaf diminutive creature; Jer. li. 
17: Ta dy chooilley ghooinney jeu ny vouran 
ayns tushtey; ta keeayl dy chooilley lheieder 
lheïe ersooyl marish e yalloo grainnit. Every 
man is brutish by his knowledge; every founder 
is confounded by the graven image. B 
e vouyranys (sic: stress), s. his little 
deafness. B  
boyn, s. f. a heel; pl. -yn.  
yn voyn, s. the heel. B  
nyn moyn, s. your, &c. heel. B 
brod-boyn, s. m. a spur; pl. 
brodyn[-]boyn. 
boynnagh, s. f. a strap or string under the 
foot, a heel strap; pl. 71 [change -agh to 
-ee].  
yn voynnagh, s. the heel strap. B 
nyn moynnagh, s. your, &c. heelstrap. B 
boynnee, a. d. of a heel or heel strap.  
oashyr-voynnee, s. f. a stocking without a 
foot but having a string under the foot. 
braag, s. f. a shoe, a person’s shoe; it is also 
used for that part of a mill that shakes the 
corn into the millstones; pl. -yn.  
yn vraag, s. the shoe. Prov. “Ta fys ec dy 
chooilley ghooinney c’raad ta’n vraag 
gortagh eh.” [Every man knows where the 
shoe hurts him.] B  
nyn mraag, s. your, &c. shoe. B 
braagey, a. d. of a shoe or shoes; Gen. xiv. 
23: Nagh goym nhee erbee, eer veih snaie gys 
strap-braagey, as nagh goym nhee erbee ta 
lhiat’s, nagh bee oyr ayd dy ghra, Ta mee er 
n’yannoo Abram berchagh. That I will not take 
from a thread even to a shoelatchet, and that I 
will not take any thing that is thine, lest thou 
shouldest say, I have made Abram rich.  
braagey, v. 
er vraagey, v. hath, &c., shod. B  
braagit, 85. shod.  
braain, s. m. a handmill, a quern; pl. -yn.  
yn vraain, s. the quern. B  
nyn mraain, s. your, &c. quern. B 
braain-olley, s. m. the shell of the razor 
fish bruised to powder.  
braar, s. m. a brother; pl. -aghyn.  
e vraar, s. his brother. B  
nyn mraar, s. your, &c. brother. B  
liass vraar, s. m. a step brother. 
braarey, a. d. of a brother or brothers.  
vraarey, a. d. of a brother or brothers; as, 
in the song: 
My vraarey chree  
She er dty choontey ta mee soie. [My dear 
brother, ’tis on thy account I am sitting.] B 
braaragh, adv. brotherly.  
neu-vraaragh, a. unbrotherly. 
braarys, s. m. brotherhood, brotherliness.  
brack, s. m. a mackerel, trout.  
yn vrack, s. the mackrel or trout. B 
brick, s. pl. mackerels, trouts, the pl. of 
brack.  
e vrick, s. his trouts or mackrels. B 
brick-fiddyr, s. pl. fry trout.  
brack, v. sharpen, or point with a tool, not by 
grinding. These bracks are all from breck 
(spotted), but I have adopted the a, as it 
approaches nearer the pronunciation; -agh. 
77; -ee, 80; -ey, 82; -in, 83; -ins. 84; -ym, 
86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
vrack, v. did point or sharpen; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys; 94. B 
dy vrackey, s. to sharpen a tool, and not by 
grinding. B 
brackit, 85. sharpened, pointed.  
ro vrackit, a. too sharpened. B 
brackeyder, s. m. a sharpener, an angler.  
yn vrackeyder, s. the pointer or sharpener. 
B 
brackan, s. m. a brindle, a small piece 
ploughed in a field; pl. -yn.  
yn vrackan, s. the brindle. B 
braddag 
yn vraddag, s. the reptile, grub, &c. B 
braddan, s. m. a salmon; pl. -yn.  
yn vraddan, s. the salmon. B 
braew, a. brave.  
dy braew, adv. bravely.  
ben vraeu, a. a brave woman or wife. B  
braewey, a. pl. brave.  
fir vraeuey, <a. d.> [a. pl.] brave men. B 
braewid, s. m. braveness.  
50 
B 
 
bragh, adv. ever; son dy bragh as dy bragh, 
(for ever and ever, —the ever that is to 
come); rieau being the ever that is past.  
bragh[-]bio, a. immortal, everliving.  
bragh-farraghtyn, a. everlasting.  
dy bragh-farraghtyn, adv. eternally, 
everlastingly.  
bra, or braa, adv. ever, a contraction of 
bragh, used oftener in poetry than in prose; 
Deut. vi. 24: As hug y Chiarn currym orrin dy 
chooilleeney ooilley ny slattyssyn shoh, dy 
ghoaill aggle roish y Chiarn nyn Yee, son y 
foays brâ ain, dy vod eh tannaghtyn dooin nyn 
mioys, myr er y laa jiu. And the Lord 
commanded us to do all these statutes, to fear 
the Lord our God, for our good always, that he 
might preserve us alive, as it is at this day.  
vra or vraa, s. (from bra) ever, used in 
poetry. B 
braghtan, s. m. (no doubt from breck or 
brack) spotted, smeared; or streaked with 
some thing spread on bread, as honey, 
butter, herring, &c. 
yn vraghtan, s. the slice or piece of bread 
spread over with butter, &c. B 
braghtan-eeymey, s. m. a buttercake, or a 
cake spread or spotted with butter or any 
other eatable. The Welsh have it breckdan. 
It is sometimes used for any thing flattened 
or bruised flat; as, t[’]ou er nyannoo 
braghtan jeh. [Thou hast made a cake of it.] 
brah, v. betray, betraying; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
vrah, v. did betray; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. B 
ro vrahit, a. too betrayed. B 
fir vrahee, s. betrayers. B 
braheyder, s. m. a betrayer; pl. -yn.  
yn vraheyder, s. the betrayer. B 
bran[-]clooie, s. f. the down of feathers.  
yn vran-clooie, s. the down. B 
branglash, s. f. something wrong, in error, or 
amiss.  
yn vranglash, s. the wrong or error. B 
branl, v. fallow; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins. 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
vranl or vranlee, v. did fallow; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B 
<branlagh or> branlaghey, v. <would> 
fallow or break up, or plough land, to 
expose to the sun or to dry.  
branley, v. fallowing;  
dy vranley, v. to fallow. B 
branlit, 85. fallowed, ploughed.  
ro vranlit, a. too fallowed. B  
branley, s. m. a fallow, pl. 67 [change -ey 
to -aghyn].  
branleyder, s. m. a fallower, pl. -yn.  
yn vranleyder, s. the fallower. B 
branlaadagh, s. m. f. a raver, a person 
incoherent in his talk; pl. 71 [change -agh 
to -ee]; Jude, 8: Er yn aght cheddin neesht ta 
ny branlaadee shoh sollaghey yn eill, soiaghey 
beg jeh reilltys, as goltooaney ny pooaraghyn 
syrjey. Likewise also these filthy dreamers 
defile the flesh, despise dominion, and speak 
evil of dignities.  
branlaadee, [s]. raving.  
e vranlaadee, s. his ravings. B 
branlaader, s. m. a dreamer; Deut. xiii. 3: 
Cha neaisht oo rish goan y phadeyr, n’yn 
branlaader cheddin. Thou shalt not hearken 
unto the words of that prophet, or that dreamer 
of dreams.  
yn vranlaader, s. the raver. B  
branlaadys, s. m. the action of raving.  
e vranlaadys, s. his ravings. B  
branlaig, s. f. a breach or creek on a shore 
between rocks; pl. -yn. Had the plural of 
this word been used in translating breaches 
in Judges v. 17, it would have been more 
correct than the word purtyn. (Duirree Gilead 
cheu elley dy Yordan: as cre’n-fa va Dan cur 
rish e lhuingys? duirree Asher rish oirr ny 
marrey, as v’eh ny haaue ayns ny purtyn. 
Gilead abode beyond Jordan: and why did Dan 
remain in ships? Asher continued on the sea 
shore, and abode in his breaches.) 
yn vranlaig, s. the breach on a shore. B 
branleycan, s. m. the staggers in horses.  
yn vranleycan, s. the staggers. B 
brans, v. dash; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -ey or -al, 
(dashing); -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
51 
B 
 
vrans, v. did dash; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. B 
bransey, v. 
dy vransey, v. to dash; Isa. xiii. 16: Bee nyn 
gloan myrgeddin er ny vransey ayns peeshyn 
roish nyn sooillyn; nyn dhieyn vees spooillit, as 
ny mraane oc goit er-êgin. Their children also 
shall be dashed to pieces before their eyes; 
their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives 
ravished. B  
bransit, pt. dashed; Hos. xiii. 16: …tuittee 
ad liorish y chliwe: bee ny oikanyn oc bransit 
ayns peeshyn, as ny mraane torragh oc raipit 
seose. …they shall fall by the sword: their 
infants shall be dashed in pieces, and their 
women with child shall be ripped up.  
brash-dy-eash, well up in age.  
brash, s. m. brace.  
e vrash, s. his brace. B 
brashlagh, s. f. something to brace, as a 
crupper.  
yn vrashlagh, s. the crupper. B 
brashlagh, s. f. charlock or wild mustard.  
yn vrashlagh, s. the charlock. B 
brashleid, s. f. a bracelet; pl. -yn.  
brasn or brasnee, v. provoke, insult, excite to 
anger; -agh, 77; -aghey, 82; -ee, 80; -ey, 
(-ey and -aghey are of the same meaning); 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
vrasn or vrasnee, v. did provoke, 
stimulate, or affront, did exasperate; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B 
brasney or brasnaghey, v. 
dy vrasney, v. to provoke or exasperate. B 
er vrasnaghey, v. hath, &c. provoked, &c. 
B  
brasnee, a. d. of provocation or insult.  
glaare vrasnee, a. d. provoking, or 
affronting language, &c. B 
jolg-vrasnee, s. f. some will have it that 
this is the proper Manks for spur; pl. jilg. 
brasnit, 85. provoked, excited. 
ro vrasnit, a. too provoked, &c. B 
brasneyder, s. m. a provoker; pl. -yn.  
yn vrasneyder, s. the provoker, &c. B 
brasnag, s. f. a brand, a piece of stick to 
burn, a torch. Zec. xii. 6: Ayns y laa shen 
neem’s kiannoortyn Yudah goll-rish chiollagh 
dy aile mastey’n fuygh, as myr brasnag aile 
ayns bunney arroo. In that day will I make the 
governors of Judah like an hearth of fire among 
the wood, and like a torch of fire in a sheaf; pl. 
-yn.  
yn vrasnag, s. the brand. B 
breadag, s. f. a caterpillar, a reptile, a worm 
that cuts holes in bodies. See also braddag; 
pl. -yn.  
braddag, s. f. a rough grub or worm; pl. 
-yn.  
praddag. Psl. lxxviii. 47: Hug eh yn vess oc 
da'n vraddag as yn laboraght oc da'n locust. 
He gave their fruit unto the caterpillar: and their 
labour unto the grasshopper. See braddag 
[caterpillar. NB 1819 Bible has vraddag in 
this passage as you would expect. The 
Prayer Book (1777), however, has ‘da’n 
phraddag [caterpillar]’ (sic)]. 
breadagh, s. f. a stretcher, a swingletree; pl. 
71 [change -agh to -ee], and -yn.  
yn vreadagh, s. the swingletree. B 
breag or breg, s. f. a lie, a fib; pl. -yn.  
yn vreag, s. the lie. B 
breg, s. f. a lie; pl. -yn; 1 Kings, xiii. 18: 
Dooyrt eh rish, Ta mish my adeyr neesht myr 
t’ou uss, as loayr ainle rhym liorish goo’n 
Chiarn, gra, Cur lhiat eh back mayrt gys dty hie, 
dy vod eh gee arran as giu ushtey. Agh she 
breg dinsh eh da. He said unto him, I am a 
prophet also as thou art; and an angel spake 
unto me by the word of the Lord, saying, Bring 
him back with thee into thine house, that he 
may eat bread and drink water. But he lied unto 
him.  
yn vreg, s. the lie; 1 Kings, xiii. 8 [deest; cf. 
supra breg ?]. B 
lhiaee-vreag, s. f. a fabricated lie, a falsity 
alleged for truth; nearly of the same 
meaning with breag-lhiassit. The lhiaee in 
this word would be a. d. of false allegation 
or contrivance. [lhiassee] 
breagey, a. d. of lies; John, viii. 44: Tra t’eh 
loayrt breg, t’eh loayrt jeh e chooid hene: son 
t’eh ny breagerey, as ayr ny breagey. When he 
speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own: for he is 
52 
B 
 
a liar, and the father of it. 
breagey, v. 
er vreagey, v. hath, &c. lied; <John, viii. 
44.> B 
breagagh, a. lying, telling lies.  
s’breagagh, a. how addicted to lying or 
telling lies. B 
s’breagee, id., com. and sup. B 
feer vreagagh, a. very lying. B 
feer vregagh, See vreagagh. B  
breagerey, s. m. a liar; pl. 69 [change -ey 
to -yn].  
yn vreagerey, s. the liar. B 
breb, v. kick, push with the foot; -agh, 77; 
-al, 79; -ee, 80; -ey, 82; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
vreb, v. did kick or kicked; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B 
dy vrebal, v. to kick, B 
ro vrebit, a. too much kicked. B  
breb, s. m. a kick, or push with the foot.  
brebeyder 
yn vrebeyder, s. the one who kicks. B 
breban, s. m. a little kick; it is used for any 
filth or dirt adhering to persons or things by 
being kicked, or rubbed against; pl. -yn.  
yn vreban, s. the small kick, or what is left 
of dirt by a kick. B 
brebanagh, a. having any dirt or filth by 
being rubbed or kicked against.  
feer vrebanagh, a. very full of dirt by 
kicks. B 
brebag, s. f. a kiln without a roof to dry corn 
or flax on; it is also applied to a certain 
posture when sitting at the fire; pl. -yn. 
Perhaps the etymology of this word is bree-
beg.  
yn vrebag, s. the kiln without a roof; the 
certain posture to warm. B 
breck, a. spotted, variegated, piebald, 
brindled, of many colours.  
feer vreck, a. very spotted, variegated, &c. 
B 
garee-breck, s. f. the bird sea-pie. 
lubban breck, s. f. a sea nettle. 
breckan-sniengan, s. m. a medley colour.  
breckey, a. pl. brindled, piebald.  
breckey, v. 
dy vrackey, s. to variegate. B 
breckagh, v. would, &c. brindle, &c.  
breckit, 85. brindled, spotted.  
breck, s. f. the small pox; pl. -yn.  
yn vreck, s. the smallpox. B 
ynnyd y vreck, s. f. the marks of the small 
pox. 
breck-kiark, s. f. chicken pox.  
breck-ollee, s. f. the cow pox. 
breck-sy-nane or breck-sy-ghrian, s. f. 
spots or freckles on the skin, caused by the 
heat of the sun.  
brecklagh 
yn vrecklagh, s. the something very 
spotted. B 
bredagh, a. thievish, furtive, stolen.  
s’breddagh, a. how thievish. B 
feer vreddagh, a. very thievish. B  
braddagh, a. thievish. See bredagh. Prov. 
ix. 17: S’millish ta ushtaghyn braddagh, as 
arran eeit dy follit, te blaystal. Stolen waters are 
sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant.  
bredid, s. m. thievishness, theft.  
e vreddid, s. his thievishness or theft. B 
bree, s. m. steam, vigour, energy, efficacy, 
virtue; as, bree yn uill echey (the virtue of 
his blood).  
yn vree, s. the steam or vigour, &c. B 
ass-bree, a. faint, null, void. 
lhong-vree, s. f. a steam-vessel. 
breeaghey or breeghey, v. inspiring.  
breeaghys, s. m. inspiration.  
breeoil, a. vigorous, energetic. 
s’breeoil, a. how vigorous or forcible, how 
energetic or full of meaning. B 
s’breeoiley, a. id., comp. and sup. B 
feer vreeoil, a. very vigorous, &c. B 
breeockle, s. m. a vowel.  
yn vreeockle, s. the vowel. B 
breearr, v. vow; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
vreear or vreearr*, v. did vow, vowed, 
swear; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. 
ro vreearrit, a. too vowed. B 
breearrey, s. m. a vow; pl. 67 [change -ey 
to -aghyn].  
e vreearrey, s. his vow. B 
53 
B 
 
breearreyder, s. m. one who vows; pl. -yn.  
yn vreearreyder, s. the one who vows. B 
breeck, s. f. a brick; pl. -yn.  
yn vreeck, s. the brick. B 
breen or breenid, s. m. sultriness, heat, 
warmth.  
yn vreen or vreenid, s. the sultriness. B 
breeney, a. pl. sultry, sweltry.  
vreeney, a. pl. sultry. B 
breenagh, a. sultry, sweltry.  
s’breenagh, a. how sultry or warm. B 
s’breenee, a. more sultry, most sultry. B 
feer vreenagh, a. very sultry. B  
Breeshey, s. f. Bride or Bridget.  
Laa’l Breeshey, s. the feast of St. Brede or 
Bridget, kept on the first of February. 
Oie’l Vreeshey, s. Brede or Bridget’s night 
or vigil. B 
bossan Vreeshey, s. f. buckshorn. 
moylley Vreeshey, praise to St. Bridget. 
breid, s. f. a veil; pl. -yn.  
yn vreid, s. the veil. B  
breid, v. 
vreid, v. did veil or veiled; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94; 2 Kings ix. 30: As tra va 
Jehu er jeet gys Jezreel, cheayll Jezebel jeh; 
as hug ee paint er e eddin, as vreid ee e kione, 
as yeeagh ee magh er uinniag. And when Jehu 
was come to Jezreel, Jezebel heard of it; and 
she painted her face, and tired her head, and 
looked out at a window. B  
breidit, 85. veiled.  
breig* or breag, v. coax, endeavour to 
persuade. The former spelling is here 
adopted as it agrees better with the sound, 
although the latter orthography is used in 
Mat. xxviii. 14: As my chlinnys y kiannoort 
jeh, nee mayd eshyn y vreagey as shiuish y 
heyrey. And if this come to the governor’s ears, 
we will persuade him, and secure you; and 
also for a lie; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -ey, 82; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
vreig, v. did coax or coaxed; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B 
dy vreigey, v. to coax. B 
breigit, 85. coaxed, wheedled.  
ro vreigit, a. too coaxed. B 
breigeyder, s. m. a coaxer; pl. -yn. 
yn vreigeyder, s. the coaxer. B 
breigh, s. m. a short rough substance growing 
on rocks under full sea mark, used by 
fishermen to preserve bait alive.  
breim, s. m. posterior flatulency. 
breim, v. id. -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
vreim, v. did break wind behind; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B 
breimaragh, v. 
dy vreimaragh, v. to fart. B 
breimeyder, s. m. a breaker of wind.  
yn vreimeyder, s. the farter. B 
breimagh, a. flatulous.  
breimen, s. m. the dim. of breim; a stinking 
fellow.  
yn vreimin, s. the stinking fellow. B 
brein, s. f. womb, matrice or matrix; pl. -yn. 
Had this word been written bwrein, it 
would have shown more analogy to its 
relatives bwoirryn, bwoirrynagh, &c.; but 
as a learned author observes of the 
orthography and pronunciation of words, 
fixed beyond the reach of etymology to 
alter, have, like land, limitations to their 
rights. When orthography or pronunciation 
has obtained a long standing, though by 
false title, it is perhaps better to leave it in 
quiet possession, than to disturb the 
language by an ancient though better claim.  
yn vrein, s. the womb. B 
breinney, a. d. of a fowl’s womb, &c.  
breinn, a. nasty, filthy, stinking. 
breinney, a. pl. id.  
s’brein, a. how nasty or filthy. B 
s’breiney, a. nastier, nastiest. B 
ro vreinn, a. too stinking or nasty. B 
breinn, v. [stink]; -agh, 77; -aghey, 82; 
-ee, 80; -ys, 88.  
er vreinnagh or vreinnaghey, v. hath, &c. 
stunk or become stinking. B 
breinnid, s. m. nastiness, stink, filth.  
dy vreinnid, s. of nastiness, stink. B 
breinney, s. m. the part that hangs under the 
belly of a brood goose; pl. 67 [change -ey 
to -aghyn].  
54 
B 
 
yn vreinney, s. the part that hangs under 
the belly of a brood goose. B 
breleig, s. f. a pack saddle, a gear made of 
straw ropes and covered with woollen cloth 
to ride on; pl. -yn.  
yn vreleig, s. See breleig. 
brelleein, s. f. a sheet; pl. -yn.  
yn vrelleein, s. the sheet. B 
brellish, s. f. wort, fermented or fermenting.  
yn vrellish, s. the ale wort. B 
breneen, s. f. an atom, a mote; pl. -yn.  
yn vreneen, s. the mote or atom. B 
breneenagh, a. full of motes.  
feer vreneenagh, a. very full of motes, &c. 
B 
breshag, s. f. the mat or cloth of a sledge car.  
yn vreishag, s. See radical breishag. 
Bretyn, s. m. Wales, Britain.  
Çheer Vretyn, s. the Welsh country, 
Wales. B  
Bretnagh, s. m. a Welsh man; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]; a. Welsh.  
yn Vretnagh, s. the Welshman. B 
e Vretnee, s. his Welsh people. B 
Bretnish, s. f. the Welsh language.  
yn Vretnish, s. the Welsh language. B  
brey, s. f. a beast’s womb.  
brey-ee or berhee, v. will, &c. calve, lay, 
&c.  
behr or berr, v. lay, yean, calve, foal.  
brey-ys or berhys, v. shall, &c. calve, lay, 
&c.  
breyagh, v. (pronounced beragh), would, 
&c. calve, lay, &c.  
vrey, v. did calve, lay, yean, &c. Vehr is the 
word used in common talk; -agh; -ee; -ys, 
94. B  
vehr or verr, v. did calve, yean, lay, foal, 
&c.; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B  
brey, v. laying, calving, yeaning, foaling, 
&c.  
breh. See brey.  
berht or bert, pt. layed, calved, foaled, 
yeaned, &c.; Exod. xxxiv. 19: Ta ooilley yn 
chied-ruggit lhiam’s, as dy chooilley chied-bert 
mastey dty vaase edyr eh ve dow, ny keyrrey, 
ta fyrryn. All that openeth the matrix is mine; 
and every firstling among thy cattle, whether ox 
or sheep, that is male.  
ro verrt, a. too calved, layed, &c. B 
brey-bio, a. viviparous. 
briçhyn, s. pl. breeches.  
e vriçhyn, s. his breeches. B 
brie, v. enquire, ask; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
vri* or vrie, v. did enquire, ask or enquired; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94 B 
briaght, v. enquiring; s. m. intelligence.  
er vriaght, v. hath, &c., enquired or asked. 
B 
briet, 85. enquired after, informed of.  
ro vriet, a. too enquired or asked. B  
brieyder, s. m. an enquirer, and asker.  
brialtagh, s. m. an enquirer; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee]; Heb. xi. 31; spies: Liorish 
credjue ve, nagh ren yn ven-oast Rahab 
cherraghtyn maroosyn nagh ren credjal, tra hug 
ee oltagh-bea da ny brialtee ayns shee. By 
faith the harlot Rahab perished not with them 
that believed not, when she had received the 
spies with peace.  
briggyl, s. m. a worthless creature.  
brish, v. break; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
vrish, v. did break or broke; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B 
brishey, v. breaking. 
er vrishey, v. hath, &c., broke or broken. B 
er vrishey-poosey, v. hath, &c., committed 
adultry, literally broke marriage. B 
brisht, 85. broken, not whole.  
s’brisht, a. how broken. B 
ro vrisht, a. too broken. B 
bee brisht, s. m. offal, giblets. 
cree-brisht, s. m. a broken heart. 
brishey, s. m. a break; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. “Ayns brishey jeh’n eayst ta mee 
er vakin Moghrey grou cur lesh fastyr 
aalin.” [In the breaking of the moon, I have 
seen a gloomy morning bringing a fine 
evening.] 
brishee, a. d. of brokerage or brokage.  
brishey-poosey, s. m. adultery, a breach of 
marriage.  
brisheyder, s. m. a breaker; pl. -yn.  
55 
B 
 
yn vrisheyder, s. the breaker. B 
brishtagh or brishlagh, a. brittle.  
s’brishtagh, a. how brittle, &c. B 
s’brishtee, a. more brittle, most brittle. B 
feer vrishtagh, a. very brittle. B 
briw, s. m. a judge, a deemster; pl. -nyn. Has 
this word any analogy to the Irish brehon? 
Prov. “Eshyn nagh gow rish briw erbee 
t’eh deyrey eh hene.” [He who 
acknowledges no judge condemns himself.] 
yn vriw, s. the judge or deemster. B 
briw-agglish, s. m. an ecclesiastical judge, 
or a vicar-general.  
briw-marrey, s. m. a water bailiff.  
ard-vriw, s. m. chancellor; Ezra, iv. 17: 
Eisht hug y ree ansoor gys Rehum yn ard-vriw, 
as gys Shimshai yn scrudeyr. Then sent the 
king an answer unto Rehum the chancellor, 
and to Shimshai the scribe. 
briwnys, s. f. judgment; pl. -yn or -syn.  
e vriwnyssyn, s. his judgments. B  
nyn mriwnys, s. your, &c. judgment. B 
briwnys, v. judge; as, Easht lesh dagh 
cleaysh, eisht jean briwnys. [Listen with 
each ear, then make judgment]; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -it, 85; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
er vriwnys, v. hath, &c., judged. B 
broatçh, v. tap; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -eil, 81; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
vroaçh, v. did tap; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys. B  
broaçheil, v. 
dy vroaçheil, v. to broach or tap. B 
ro vroaçhit, a. too tapped. B 
yn vroaçheyder, s. the tapper. B 
broatçhey, s. m. a quantity of yarn or thread 
wound on a spindle without a spool; pl. 69 
[change -ey to -yn].  
yn vroaçhey, s. the roll of yarn or thread. B 
broc, s. m. a badger.  
yn vroc, s. the badger. B 
brock, s. m. orts, refuse. 
yn vrock, s. the orts. B  
brock, v. make orts or refuse; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88.  
vrock, v. did make ort or refuse of; -agh; 
-ys B  
broagey or brockey, v. making orts or 
refuse, making a thing in a bungling 
manner.  
dy vrockey, v. to make orts of. B 
brockit, 85. ortsed, made into refuse.  
ro vrockit, a. too ortsed. B  
brockeyder, s. m. a maker of orts.  
brod, a. the choice or best of some things; as, 
brod guilley.  
brod, s. m. a goad.  
brod, v. pierce, prick; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-ey, 82; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
vrod or vrodd*, v. did pierce, poke, stab, 
prick; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B  
dy vroddey, v. to pierce, poke, &c. B  
brodit, 85. pierced, pricked.  
ro vroddit, a. too pierced, &c. B  
yn vroddeyder, s. the piercer, &c. B  
brod-boyn, s. m. a spur; pl. 
brodyn[-]boyn.  
broggil, s. m. breast, collar. See it aspirated in 
Rev. ix. 9: As va oc eïlley-vroggil myr yiarn; 
as va sheean nyn skianyn myr feiyr fainee 
ymmodee cabbil roie gys y chaggey. And they 
had breastplates, as it were breastplates of 
iron; and the sound of their wings was as the 
sound of chariots of many horses running to 
battle.  
brockil, s. f. collar. See broggil.  
yn vrockil or v[r]oghil, s. the breast or 
collar; as, eilley vroghil, (breast armour). B  
eilley vroghil, s. m. breast armour, 
harbergeon. 
brocklyn, s. pl. the fore parts of a 
waistcoat.  
e vrockl[y]n, s. his fore parts for a 
waistcoat. B 
broie, v. boil; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
vroi* or vroie, v. did boil or boiled; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B 
broiet, 85. boiled, baked.  
ro vroiet, a. too much boiled. B  
broie, a. 
s’broie, a. how boiled or baked, comp. and 
56 
B 
 
sup. B 
broiey, a. pl. boiled.  
anvroie, a. parboiled. 
garvroie, a. parboiled. This word may be 
from garrey dy vroie or from giare vroie. 
neu-vroie, a. unboiled. 
broit, s. m. broth; pl. -yn.  
yn vroit, s. the broth. B  
yn vroieder, s. the boiler. B 
broigh or broghe, a. dirty, filthy. 
s’broigh, a. how dirty or muddy. B 
s’broiee, a. dirtier, dirtiest. B 
broighey, a. pl. dirty. 
broigh, v. -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
vroigh, v. did dirty or dirtied; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B 
broighey, v. dirtying.  
dy vroighey, v. to dirty, &c. B 
broighit, 85. dirtied.  
s’broighit, a. how dirtied. B 
ro vroighit, a. too dirtied. B  
broigheyder, s. m. a person who spoils 
with dirt; pl. -yn.  
yn vroigheyder, s. the dirtier. B 
broid, s. m. dirt, filth, filthiness.  
yn vroid, s. the dirt, filth, filthiness. B 
broill, s. m. the part of a tool that bruises 
down by being hammered on, as on the 
upper end of a jumper, a chisel, or the point 
of a rivet. There is no corresponding word 
in English.  
broill, v. -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -ey, 82; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
vroill, v. did bur or bruise down; -agh; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. See broill. B 
dy vroilley, v. to bur or bruise down. B 
broillit, 85. the participle of the above.  
ro vroillit, a. too much bruised or blunted. 
B 
yn vroilleyder, s. the bruiser, &c. B 
brooil, s. m. bruised bits.  
brooillagh, s. m. crumbs, fragments.  
yn vrooill or vrooillagh, s. the crumbs. B 
broo, s. m. a bruise; pl. -ghyn. 
broo, v. -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
vroo, v. did bruise or bruised; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B 
brooit or broojit, 85. bruised.  
ro vroojit, a. too much bruised. B 
brooder, s. m. a bruiser; pl. -yn.  
yn vrooder, s. the bruiser. B 
broogh, s. f. brink, verge, precipice.  
yn vroogh, s. the brink or brow. B 
brooinyn, s. pl. brinks, the pl. of broogh.  
e vroonyn, s. his brinks or brows. B 
brooighe, s. m. a belch, breaking wind 
upwards.  
brooight, v. 
vrooight, v. did belch or belched; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B 
brooight<o>oil, v. belching, rifting; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
dy vrooightoil, v. to belch. B 
brouish, s. f. brewis; pl. -yn.  
yn vrouish, s. the brewis. B 
brouit, s. m. a brutish fellow, a sloven.  
yn vrout or vrouit, s. the brute. B 
brouitagh, a. brutish, slutish.  
s’broutagh, a. how brutish. B 
s’broutee, a. more brutish, most brutish. B 
ro vroutagh, a. too brutish or brutal. B 
broutid 
e vroutid, s. his brutishness or brutality. B 
bruan, s. m. a rash, cutaneous disorder; pl. 
-yn.  
yn vruan, s. the rash. B 
feer vruanagh, a. very full of rash. B 
bry, s. f. malt; Prov. “Ta aile meeley jannoo 
bry millish.” [A slow fire makes sweet 
malt.]  
yn vry, s. the malt. Prov. “Ta’n vry erskyn 
y churnaght.” [The malt is above the 
wheat.] B 
braghey, a. d. of malt, or of the malt.  
vraghey, a. d. of malt. B 
coamrey-vraghey, s. The meaning of 
coamrey in this word is not now in use; it 
was an old custom of going to drink ale or 
beer in the person’s house where the malt-
seller sold his malt. 
braghee, a. malty.  
feer vraghee, a. very malty. B 
57 
B 
 
braghey, v. 
er vraghey, v. hath, &c., malted. B 
yn vragheyde[r], s. the maltster. B 
e vraghid, s. his maltiness. B 
bryneraght, v. flattering.  
dy vrynneraght, v. to flatter. B 
brynerys. s. m. flattery.  
e vrynnerys, s. his flattery. B 
brynnid 
e vrynnid, s. his pertness. 
brynnagh or brynnyragh, a. flattering, 
smooth or false talk; Isa. xxx. 10: Ny jean-
jee phadeyrys dooin reddyn cairagh; loayr-jee 
rooin goan brynnagh, jean-jee phadeyrys 
foalsey. Prophesy not unto us right things, 
speak unto us smooth things, prophesy 
deceits.  
s’brinnagh, a. how pert or full of flattery. 
B 
s’brinnee, a. id., com. and sup. B 
feer vrynnagh, a. very pert or flatterous. B 
brynnyree, s. pl. flatterers, hypocritical 
mockers; Psl. xxxv. 16: Marish ny brynnyree 
va grindeyryn connyssagh: ren snaggeraght 
orrym lesh nyn veeacklyn. With the flatterers 
were busy mockers: who gnashed upon me 
with their teeth.  
brynt, a. pert, fluent, loquacious.  
s’brint, a. how flatterous, &c. B 
ro vrynt, a. too pert. 
buckyl, or buggyl 
yn vuggyl, s. the buckle. B  
e vuclyn, s. his buckles. B 
buggane, s. m. a bug-bear, a browny, a 
scarecrow, something to frighten; pl. -yn.  
yn vuggane, s. the bugbear or brownee. B 
bugganeagh, a. frightful, dreary.  
s’bugganagh, a. how dreary, frightful, 
dismal. B 
s’bugganee, a. id., comp. and sup. B 
feer vugganeagh, a. very dreary or 
frightful, very dismal, apt to frighten. B  
bugganys, s. m. frightfulness, dreariness.  
bugogue, s. f. a buck thorn berry; pl. -yn.  
yn vug<g>ogue, s. the buckthorn. B 
drine bugogue (the buck thorn); 
buigh or bwee, a. yellow.  
bwee, a. See buigh (yellow).  
s’buighey, a. more yellow, most yellow. B 
ro vuigh, a. too yellow. B 
ro wuigh or wee, a. 42. too yellow. B 
ro wee, a. too yellow. See wuigh. B  
buighey or bweey, a. pl. yellow.  
baskaid-wuigh, s. f. the wild or field 
marygold. 
billey-bwee or buigh, s. m. bay tree or 
laurel. 
blaashagh-buigh, s. f. the wild or field 
marygold. 
lus y wee or wuigh, s. f. woald or wold, 
dyer’s weed, for dying yellow. 
ushag wee, s. f. the yellow hammer. 
buighey, v. making yellow.  
er vuighey, v. hath, &c. yellowed. B 
buighey, s. f. the jaundice or yellows.  
yn weeighey, s. the jaundice. B 
yn wuighey or weeighey, s. 42. the 
jaundice. B 
bwinnican, s. m. the yolk of an egg; pl. 
-yn.  
e winnican, s. 42. his yolk. B 
nyn mwinnican, s. your, &c. yolk. B 
buinn, v. reap, shear; -agh, 77; -ee, 80, -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
vuinn, v. did reap or reaped, did shear corn, 
pull flax, hemp, ling; cut turf, &c.; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B  
dy wuinn, 42. See vuinn, to reap, &c. B  
nyn muinn, v. your, &c. reaping. B 
buinnit or buinnt, 85. reaped, shorn.  
ro vuinnit, a. too reaped, shorn, pulled, &c. 
B 
neu-whuinnit, a. unreaped, unshorn, 
unpulled. 
yn vuinneyder, s. the turf cutter, &c. B  
buinnagh 
yn wuinnagh, s. 42. the lax or looseness. B 
buirroogh or buirrooghey, v. roaring, 
growling; pl. -yn.  
buitçh, s. f. a witch. 
wuitçh, s. 42. witch. 
buitçh, v. bewitch<ing>, -agh, 77; -al, 79; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
58 
B 
 
vuitçh, v. did bewitch; -agh; -ee; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B  
wuitçh, v. did bewitch; -agh; -in; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. B 
dy wuitçhal, v. 42. to bewitch. B 
er vuitçhal, v. hath, &c. bewitched. B  
buitçhit, 85. bewitched.  
ro vuitçhit, a. too bewitched. B  
ro wuitçhit, a. 42. too bewitched. B 
yn vuitçheyder, s. the bewitcher. B  
buitçheraght, s. m. witchcraft.  
yn vuitçheraght, s. the witchcraft. B  
e wuitçheraght, s. 42. his witchcraft. B 
buitçhoor, s. m. a butcher; pl. -yn.  
yn vuitçhoor, s. the butcher. B  
buitçhoorys, s. m. butchery.  
e vuitçhoorys, s. his butchery. B  
bun, s. m. the but end, the bottom end, the 
best part, the meaning; as, cur bun dou er 
(give me the meaning of it), beneath; pl. 
-yn; Ex. xxxii. 19: As haink eh gy-kione, myr 
v’eh tayrn er-gerrey gys y champ, dy chronnee 
eh yn lheiy as y daunsin: as ghreesee corree 
Voses, as hilg eh ny buird ass e laueyn, as 
vrish eh ad ec bun y clieau. And it came to 
pass, as soon as he came nigh unto the camp, 
that he saw the calf, and the dancing: and 
Moses’ anger waxed hot, and he cast the 
tables out of his hands, and brake them 
beneath the mount.  
yn vun, s. the butt end; the meaning. B 
nyn mun, s. your, &c. See bun. B  
bun-ny-geayee, s. the wind’s eye, where 
the wind blows from.  
bun-ry-skyn, adv. topsy-turvy, upside 
down.  
feer vun ry skyn, a. very topsy-turvy, or 
upside down. B 
bun[-ch]eeayl, s. m. a moral; pl. -yn.  
bundeil, s. m. bundle; pl. -yn.  
yn vundeil, s. the bundle. B 
bunney, s. f. a sheaf; pl. 68 [change -ey to 
-eeyn].  
yn vunney, s. the sheaf; pl. 68. B 
nyn munney, s. your, &c. sheaf; pl. 68. B 
bunnys, adv. almost, mostly, nearly 
altogether. Perhaps from boynnys (at the 
heels of).  
dty vunnys, s. thy almost. B 
burkan, s. m. a kimlin; pl. -yn.  
burleek, s. m. brooklime, pimpernel.  
burley, s. m. cress, cresses.  
yn vurley, s. the cress or cresses. B 
burr, s. m. the situation of a boat or vessel 
when at anchor and the wind blowing cross 
on the tide and the vessel standing between 
both, a tack in sailing. 
burr, v. -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -ey, 82; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
Burroo, s. m. a large rock on the Southern 
extremity of the Calf Island, called in 
English, the Eye Rock.  
yn Vurroo, s. the Eye Rock at the Calf. B 
bussal, a handkerchief; pl. -yn.  
yn vussal, s. the handkerchief. B 
nyn mussal, s. your, &c. handkerchief. B 
bussalagh, a. d. of a handkerchief; as, 
bayrn bussallagh (a cap or hood with a 
neck-band attached).  
bwaag, s. f. a bowling stone, a stone worn 
round by the sea, a paving stone; pl. -yn.  
e waag, s. his bowling stone<s>. B 
bwaag, s. f. a hut or booth; Jonah, iv. 5: Er 
shoh hie Jonah magh ass yn ard valley as hoie 
eh er cheu-har jeh’n ard valley, as hrog eh 
bwaag da hene ayns shen, as hoie eh fo yn 
scadoo echey, dy chur-my-ner cre’n erree 
harragh er yn ard-valley. So Jonah went out of 
the city, and sat on the east side of the city, and 
there made him a booth, and sat under it in the 
shadow, till he might see what would become 
of the city; pl. -yn.  
e waag, s. his hut or cottage. B 
bwaagh, a. pretty, beautiful.  
s’bwaagh, a. how pretty. B 
s’bwaaie, a. prettier, prettiest. B 
feer waagh or whaagh, a. very pretty. B 
bwaaghey, a. pl. pretty, &c.  
bwoyid, s. m. prettiness, beauty.  
bwaane, s. m. a cot or cottage, a small house 
where booths are erected for cattle. Perhaps 
from beth, Heb. (a house); pl. -yn; Hab. iii. 
17: …dy bee yn chioltane giarit jeh veih’n 
59 
B 
 
woaillee, as nagh bee dew ayns ny bwaneyn. 
…the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and 
there shall be no herd in the stalls. 
yn waane or wane, s. the cow-house or 
booth. B 
bwhon, s. m. a stump; pl. -yn.  
yn whon, s. the stump. B 
bwhonnagh 
feer whonnagh, a. very stumpy. B 
bwilleen, s. f. a loaf.  
e willeen s. 42. his loaf; Lev. xxiii. 17: Ver 
shiu lhien ass nyn gummallyn daa willeen-
ourallagh, jeh hoght chaart dy flooyr meein, bee 
ad shoh jeant lesh soorit, t’ad toshiaght ny 
messyn gys y chiarn. Ye shall bring out of your 
habitations two wave loaves of two tenth deals; 
they shall be of fine flour; they shall be baken 
with leaven; they are the firstfruits unto the 
Lord. B  
nyn mwilleen, s. your, &c. loaf; pl. -yn. B 
bwilleen[-]kail, s. f. a cabbage; pl. -yn.  
bwoaill, v. strike, dash; Mat. iv. 6: Ver eh 
currym da e ainleyn my-dty-chione, as ayns 
nyn laueyn nee ad oo y ymmyrkey, nagh 
bwoaill oo ec traa erbee dty chass noi chlagh. 
He shall give his angels charge concerning 
thee: and in their hands they shall bear thee up, 
lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a 
stone; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
woaill, v. 42. did strike or smite; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. B 
bwoalley, v. striking, threshing.  
dy woalley, v. 42. to strike, to thresh. B 
bwoaillit, 85. struck, threshed.  
bwoailt 
s’bwoailt, how threshed or struck. B 
ro woailt, a. 42. [too] threshed or striken. B 
ro wuilt, a. 42. too smitten. B 
bwoailley, s. m. a stroke, a blow, a box. 
Prov. “T’ad beaghey bwoailley er keyt as 
bwoilley er moddey.” [They are living 
striking on a cat and striking on a dog, i.e. 
living a cat-and-dog life.] 
builley, s. m. a blow. See also bwoailley; 
pl. 67 [change -ey to -aghyn].  
yn woailley, s. 42. the blow or stroke. B 
yn vuilley, s. the blow or stroke. B 
yn wuilley, s. 42. the blow or stroke. B 
nyn muill[e]y, s. your, &c. blow; pl. 67. B 
bwoallee, a. d. of threshing or striking; as, 
mwyllin bwoallee.  
laare-voaillee, s. the threshing or 
winnowing floor. 
bwoailley-bassey, s. m. a slap; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn].  
bwoalleyder, s. m. a striker, thresher.  
yn woailleyder, s. 42. the striker or smiter. 
B  
bwoaillteen, s. m. a beetle, a mallet; pl. 
-yn.  
yn woailteen, s. 42. the heavy mallet. B 
bwoailtys, s. m. quarrelsomeness, strife 
that comes to blows.  
bwoalteyr, s. m. a striker, &c.; pl. -yn.  
yn woailteyr (sic: stress), s. 42. the striker 
or smiter. B  
bwoailtagh 
s’bwoailtagh, a. how apt to strike. B 
s’bwoailtee, a. apter, or aptest to strike. B 
ro woailtagh, a. 42. too apt to strike. B 
bwoaillee, s. f. a fold; a halo or circle round 
the sun or moon.  
yn woaillee, s. 42. the fold. B 
bwoaillagh, a. d. of a fold or folds.  
bwoailtçhyn, s. pl. foldings, folds.  
e woailtçhyn, s. 42. [his] folds or foldings. 
B 
nyn mwoailtçhyn, s. your, &c. folds; Jer. 
xxiii. 3: As nee’m fooilliagh my hioltane y 
haglym ass dy chooilley heer raad ta mee er 
n’eiyrt ad, as ver-ym lhiam ad reesht gys nyn 
mwoailtchyn hene; as bee ad messoil as nee 
ad bishaghey. And I will gather the remnant of 
my flock out of all countries whither I have 
driven them, and will bring them again to their 
folds; and they shall be fruitful and increase. B 
bwoid, s. m. the penis.  
e woid, s. 42. his penis. B 
bwhid, s. the pl. of bwoid.  
e whid, s. his penises. B 
bwhid-suggane, s. pl. stones set in the 
walls of a thatched house to tie the ropes to.  
bwoid-saggart, s. m. the herb orchis 
satircon.  
60 
B 
 
bwoie, s. m. a boy; pl. -aghyn.  
e woie, s. 42. his boy; pl. -aghyn. B 
bwoirryn, a. female, feminine.  
kirree woirryn, s. 42. she sheep. B 
bwoirryinagh, s. f. a she, a female; an 
animal with a womb; pl. 71 [change -agh to 
-ee].  
un woirrynagh, s. 42. one female. B 
bwoirrynid or bwoirrynys, s. f. feminality, 
effeminacy, effemination.  
yn woirrynid, s. 42. the feminality. B 
bwooish or bwooishal, s. f. a wish or 
wishing. I have only inserted this noun as I 
think it rather an Anglicism: we have the 
verb very elegantly expressed in baill or 
saill, which see.  
by 
by-ghoillee, adv. because of difficulty or 
hardness; Ex. xiii. 15: As haink eh gy-kione, 
tra dy by-ghoillee lesh Pharaoh yn raad y 
lhiggey dooin, dy ren y Chiarn stroie ooilley’n 
chied er ny ruggey ayns cheer Egypt, 
chammah yn chied er ny ruggey jeh dooinney 
as baagh. And it came to pass, when Pharaoh 
would hardly let us go, that the Lord slew all the 
firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the firstborn 
of man, and the firstborn of beast.  
by-chyndagh, adv. because of.  
by-dty-chyndagh, adv. because of thee, in 
consequence of thee; Jer. xxxviii. 23: …as 
cha jean oo scapail ass ny laueyn oc, agh bee 
oo goit liorish ree Vabylon: as by-dty-
chyndagh loshtee ad yn ard-valley shoh lesh 
aile. …and thou shalt not escape out of their 
hand, but shalt be taken by the hand of the king 
of Babylon: and thou shalt cause this city to be 
burned with fire.  
by-niartal, adv. because of strength, those 
of strength; Psl. lxxviii. 52: As woaill eh 
ooilley yn chied v’er nyn ruggey ayns Egypt: yn 
vooinjer b’yrjey as by-niartal ayns cummallyn 
Ham. And smote all the first-born in Egypt: the 
most principal and mightiest in the dwellings of 
Ham. 
by-niessey, adv. because of nearness, 
nearest; Deut. xxi. 6: As nee ooilley shanstyr 
yn ard-valley shen by niessey da’n varroo, 
niee nyn laueyn erskyn y cholbagh ta’n chione 
goit j’ee ’sy ghlione. And all the elders of that 
city, that are next unto the slain man, shall 
wash their hands over the heifer that is 
beheaded in the valley, and 1 Chron. xxvii. 
7: Yn chiarroo chaptan son y chiarroo vee, va 
Asahel braar Yoab, as Zebadiah e vac by-
niessey da. The fourth captain for the fourth 
month was Asahel the brother of Joab, and 
Zebadiah his son after him.  
by-haittyn, adv. because of pleasure or 
delight, to pleasure or delight in.  
by-hrimshey, adv. for or because of sorrow 
or sadness.  
by-vian, v. would fain; Luke, xv. 16: As by-
vian lesh e volg y lhieeney lesh ny bleaystyn va 
ny muckyn dy ee: as cha row dooinney erbee 
hug cooney da. And he would fain have filled 
his belly with the husks that the swine did eat: 
and no man gave unto him. 
byssness, s. m. business; 1 Sam. xxi. 2: As 
dooyrt David rish Ahimelech y saggyrt, Ta mee 
currymit ayns byssness liorish y ree. And 
David said unto Ahimelech the priest, The king 
hath commanded me a business.  
bytermyn, s. m. the linnet; pl. -yn.  
61 
C 
 
C 
C as a radical initial, and the changes it 
undergoes, see Remarks 4, 5, 6, at the 
beginning of the work. Words from k and s 
also change to ch, [i.e. k changes to ch, and 
sh to çh]. 
caa, s. m. an opportunity; pl. -ghyn.  
e chah, s. 6. his opportunity; Dan. viii. 25: 
As trooid e chialgeyrys, ver eh er croutyn 
bishaghey ny laue: as nee eh lane y hoiaghey 
jeh hene ayns [mooaralys] e chree, as ec e 
chah nee eh ymmodee y stroie: And through 
his policy also he shall cause craft to prosper in 
his hand; and he shall magnify himself in his 
heart, and by peace shall destroy many. [The 
Manx and English don’t directly match 
here; where Manx has ec e chah, and 
English has by peace, the Vulgate has in 
copia rerum omnium.] 
caays, s. m. convenience, fit time.  
e chaays, s. his convenience. C  
caabaig, s. f. a thick cake, as of cheese, 
tallow, &c.; pl. -yn.  
e chaabaig, a. 6. his cake. C  
caabyl 
e chaabyl, s. his cable. C  
caabhil, s. m. cables; sing. caabyl, 76.  
caaee, s. m. seeds, as the seed of meal, &c.  
e chaaee, s. his seeds. C  
caag, s. f. a stopper, a forelock, an attached 
linchpin; pl. -yn.  
e chaag, s. his forelock. C  
caagh 
faar-y-chaagh, a. fate or fare the same. 
myr-chaagh, adv. withal, along with; 2 
Sam. xi. 17: As vrish deiney’n ard-valley 
magh, as ren ad caggey rish Joab: as huitt 
paart jeh deiney Ghavid; as hooar Uriah yn 
Hittite e vaase myr-chaagh. And the men of 
the city went out, and fought with Joab: and 
there fell some of the people of the servants of 
David; and Uriah the Hittite died also. 
caaidge, s. m. a cage; pl. -yn.  
e chaaidge, s. his cage. C  
caaig, s. f. a jay; pl. -yn.  
e chaaig, s. his jay. C  
caartr, v. calumniate, traduce, vilify; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
caartrey, v. traducing, vilifying; Hos. iv. 4: 
Ny-yeih, ny lhig da dooinney erbee caartrey, 
ny goltooan y jeh elley: Yet let no man strive, 
nor reprove another.  
caartragh, v. 
e chaartragh, v. his traducing, &c. C 
caartrit, 85. traduced, vilified.  
ro chaartrit, 85. too traduced. C  
caartreyder, s. m. a calumniator, a vilifier, 
a defamer, a traducer; pl. -yn.  
caashey, s. m. cheese; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
e chaashey, a. his cheese. C  
caayney, v. tabering; Nah. ii. 7: As bee 
Huzzab er ny leeideil ayns cappeeys, ver ad 
lhieu seose ee, as nee ny moidynyn eck shooyl 
rhymbee cooagey myr calmaneyn, as caayney 
ayns nyn gleeau. And Huzzab shall be led 
away captive, she shall be brought up, and her 
maids shall lead her as with the voice of doves, 
tabering upon their breasts; braying; Job, 
xxx. 7: Mastey ny tammagyn ren ad caayney; 
fo’n undaagagh v’ad er nyn lostey. Among the 
bushes they brayed; under the nettles they 
were gathered together.  
cab, s. f. a jaw, a loop made fast on a flail; as, 
cab sooist; pl. -byn.  
e chab, s. his jaw. C  
cab[-]ry-cheilley, s. f. a pair of scissors.  
cabbagh, u. stammering, stuttering.  
feer chabbagh, a. very stammering. C  
cabbhid, s. m. stammering, an impediment 
in speech.  
cabbag, s. f. a dock, bloodwort; pl. -yn.  
e chabbag, s. his dock. C  
cabbag-ny-hawin, s. f. colt’s-foot, cough-
wort, hart’s-hoof.  
cabbagagh 
s’cabbagagh, a. how full of docks. C 
s’cabbagee, a. id., comp, and sup. C 
cabbal, s. f. a chapel; pl. -yn.  
e chabbal, s. his chapel. C  
62 
C 
 
cabbane, s. m. a cabin, tent, tabernacle; pl. 
-yn.  
e chabbane, s. his cabin. C  
cabbaney, v. tabernacling.  
cabbyl, s. m. a horse; pl. 76 [cabbil].  
e chabbyl, s. his horse; pl. 76. There are 
many other words that aspirate or change 
the c to ch [as] <and> e (his), such as dy, 
drogh, dty, my, er, feer, ro, yn, &c. C  
e chabbil, his horses. 
chabbil, a. d. of horse or horses. 
re-hollys vooar ny gabbyl, s. f. the 
moonlight-that immediately follows the 
former [re-hollys vooar yn ouyr]. 
cabdil, s. f. a chapter; pl. -yn.  
yn chabdil, s. the chapter. C  
cabdilagh, a. d. belonging to a chapter.  
caboon, s. m. a capon, a gelded cock; pl. -yn.  
yn chaboon, s. [m]. the capon. C  
cadd, v. defend; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -ey, 82; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
dy chaddey, v. to defend; Isa. iv. 5: As er 
ooilley ynnydyn vaghee cronk Zion, as er e 
slane sheshaght, nee’n Chiarn bodjal as jaagh 
y chaddey ’sy laa, as soilshean aile sollys ’syn 
oie bee coodagh er ooilley yn ghloyr. And the 
Lord will create upon every dwelling place of 
mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud 
and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming 
fire by night: for upon all the glory shall be a 
defence. C  
caddit, 85. defended, protected.  
caddil, v. i. sleep, sleep on thou.  
cadl, v. sleep: -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
my chadlys, v. if shall or will sleep; or as it 
is in Ex. xxii. 27, chaidlys: Son shen e 
ynrican coodagh, coamrey e chorp eh: cre ayn 
chaidlys eh? For that is his covering only, it is 
his raiment for his skin: wherein shall he sleep? 
C  
chaddil, v. slept, did sleep.  
cadley, v. 
er chadley, v. hath, &c. slept. C  
cadley, s. m. sleep; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
cadlee, a. d. of sleep, or sleeping.  
gorley-cadlee, s. lethargy. 
cadlagh, a. sleepy, drowsy.  
s’cadlagh, a. how sleepy or drowsy. C  
s’cadlee, a. sleepier, sleepiest. 
trome-chadlagh, a. drowsy. 
cadlag, s. m. a sleeper, a sluggard, such as 
sleep a long time, as the bat, butterfly, &c.; 
pl. -yn.  
yn chadlag, s. the sleeper. C  
drogh chadleyder, s. a bad sleeper. C  
caddym, s. m. a disease in horses, called the 
glampus, which causes a great enlargement 
of the gums.  
yn chaddym, s. the glampus. C  
caddymit, 85. having the glampus.  
cadjer, s. m. a huckster, a monger.  
yn chadjer, s. the huckster. C  
cadjeragh, a. huckstering.  
cadjerys, s. m. huckstery, mongery.  
cadjin, [a.] common, general, catholic, 
universal, ordinary.  
s’cadjin, a. how common. C 
s’cadjinee, a. more common, most 
common. C 
feer chadjin, a. very common. C  
neu-chadjin, a. uncommon, rare; Dan. ii. 
11: As te red neu-chadjin ta’n ree dy hirrey, as 
cha vel fer erbee elley oddys soilshaghey shoh 
fenish y ree, er-lhimmey jeh ny flaunyssee 
hene, nagh vel y cummal oc marish deiney. 
And it is a rare thing that the king requireth, and 
there is none other that can shew it before the 
king, except the gods, whose dwelling is not 
with flesh. 
cadjinagh, a. commonly, generally, &c.  
cadjinys, s. m. common custom, vulgarity.  
caitnagh 
aanrit caitnagh, fustian. 
caitnys 
yn chaitnys, s. the common, the nap. C  
cagg, v. 
caggym, v. I will make war.  
caggys, v. shall, &c. make war.  
caggagh, v. would war, or make battle.  
chagg, v. did war. C  
caggit, 85. fought.  
caggey, s. m. war, battle; pl. 67 [change -ey 
to -aghyn].  
63 
C 
 
yn chaggey, s. the war. C  
caggee, a. d. of war, or battle.  
bayrn caggee, s. m. a helmet. 
eilley chaggee, s. f. armour for war. 
lhong-chaggee, s. f. a man of war. 
chah, a. d. of battle; Zec. xiv. 3: Eisht hed 
yn Chiarn magh, as nee eh caggey noi ny 
ashoonee shen, myr ren eh caggey ayns laa yn 
chah. Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight 
against those nations, as when he fought in the 
day of battle.  
caggeyder, s. m. a warrior; pl. -yn.  
caggoil, a. warlike, hostile, militant.  
caghlaa, s. m. change, diversity, alteration, 
difference; pl. -ghyn. 
caghlaaee, a. d. of change or changes. 
caghlaa, v. -agh, 77; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 
86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
chaghlaa, v. did change. C  
caghlaait, 85. changed, altered.  
s’caghlaït, a. how changed or altered.  
aigney-caghlaait, converted; 85. 
neu-chaghlaaee, a. unchangeable, 
invariable, immutable. 
caghlaader, s. m. one who changes or 
alters any thing.  
ceaghil, v. i. change; -agh, 77; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
ceaghl, v. id. -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cheaghil, v. did, or would, &c. change; 
Rom. i. 23: As cheaghil ad gloyr y Jee nagh 
vod goll naardey, gys jalloo casley rish 
dooinney ta goll naardey, as eeanlee, as beïyn 
kiare-chassagh as beishteigyn. And changed 
the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image 
made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and 
fourfooted beasts, and creeping things; -agh; 
-ee; -in; -ins: -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. C  
ceaghlagh, v. would, &c. change.  
ceaghlee, v. will, &c. change.  
ceaghlit, 85. changed, altered.  
s’ceaghlit, a. how changed or altered. C 
cagliagh, s. m. a boundary; pl. 72 [change 
-iagh to -eeyn].  
yn chagliagh, s. m. 6. the boundary. C  
caid, adv. how long.  
caign, v. chew, gnaw; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83, -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
chaign, v. did chew or gnaw; -agh; -ey; -in; 
-ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys. C  
caigney, v. chewing, gnawing. 
caignee, a. d. of chewing or gnawing.  
caignit 
s’caignit, a. how chewed or gnawed. C 
caillin, s. f. a woman; pl. -yn.  
cainle, s. f. a candle; pl. -yn.  
yn chainle, s. the candle; pl. -yn. C  
Laa’l Moirrey ny Gianle, s. m. 
Candlemas-day, kept on the second of 
February. 
cainley, a. d. 
lostey-chainley, s. m. the churching of 
women. Called so, perhaps, from the 
practice of burning a candle during the 
service in former times. 
cainleagh, a. d. of a candle or candles.  
kainlagh, a. d. of a candle, or candles.  
cainlere or cainleyr, s. m. a candlestick; pl. 
-yn.  
kainlere, s. m. a candlestick; pl. -yn.  
yn chainlere, s. the candlestick; pl. -yn. C  
cainlereagh, a. d. of a candlestick, &c.  
kainlereagh, a. d. of a candlestick.  
cair, s. m. right, share, privilege. S’mooar ta 
eddyr y chair as yn aggair. [There is a great 
difference between right and wrong. 
MWW] 
dty chair, s. thy right or share. C  
cairagh, in. right, well done; a. d. of 
justice, right, truth.  
feer chairagh, a. very right, just or exact. C  
s’cairee, a. more and most just, right, &c. 
C 
meechairagh 
 feer veechairagh, a. very unjust. M 
neu-chairagh, a. unjust, unrighteous, 
unfair. 
cairal, a. just, righteous, upright.  
feer chairal, a. very just or upright C  
cair, a. 
s’cair, scairagh, or s’cairal, a. how just, 
right, true, upright, righteous. C 
cairys, s. m. justice, right, equity. 
meechairys, s. m. iniquity, injustice. 
64 
C 
 
cairys, v. -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cair-vie, s. f. a fair wind.  
Caisht 
yn Chaisht, s. the Easter. C  
Jeheiney-Cheays or Jeheiney Chaisht, s. 
m. Good Friday; the cheays or chaisht is 
from casherick, no doubt. 
callin 
yn challin, s. the body, the carcase. C  
calmane 
yn chalmane, s. the pigeon. C  
camm or cam 
Prov. “Soddag chamm bolg jeeragh.” 
[Crooked bannock, straight belly.] C 
cammey, a. pl. crooked, wry, bent, oblique.  
s’cam, a. how crooked, wrong, distorted, 
perverted, perverse, wry. C  
s’cammey, a. the comparative and 
superlative of cam and s’cam. C 
ro chamm, a. too crooked or bent. 
c<h>amm, v. bend; -agh; -ee; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys. 
cammagh, v. 
er chammagh, v. hath, &c. bent, &c. C  
cammit, 85. bent, made crooked.  
s’cammit, a. how bent or made crooked. C 
ro chammit, 85, too much bent, &c. C  
cammey, s. m. a bend, flexure, incurvation.  
yn chammey, s. the crook or bend. C  
cammid, s. m. crookedness, curvity.  
yn chammid, s. the crookedness. C  
camlaagagh, a. crooked, or contrary to 
law, (perhaps from camleighagh), intricate, 
perverse; s. m. a froward person; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]; Job v. 13: T’eh goaill y 
vooinjer chluicagh ayns y chialgeyrys oc hene; 
as cur shaghrynys er coyrle ny camlaagee. He 
taketh the wise in their own craftiness: and the 
counsel of the froward is carried headlong. 
s’camlaagagh, a. how illegal, intricate in 
law, how implex. C 
s’camlaagee, a. id., comp. and sup. C 
ro chamlaagagh, a. too intricate or 
perverse.  
camlaagys, s. f. crookedness, perverseness, 
entanglement, intricacy, chicanery.  
e chamlaagys, a. his perverseness. C 
camlurgagh, a. bow legged.  
camstram, a. zigzag, crankled.  
ro chamstram, a. too zigzag. C  
cammag, s. f. a crutch; pl. -yn.  
e chammag, s. his crutch, &c. C  
cammag, s. f. a cricket ball; pl. -yn.  
cammah, adv. why, for what reason.  
camman, s. m. a pique, a grudge, ill will.  
camman-er-cooinney, a pique or grudge in 
memory.  
camraasagh, s. f. the herb jackins.  
cannoo 
er-cannoo, a. enamoured, dotingly fond; 
Ez. xxiii. 12: V’ee er-cannoo lurg ny 
Assyrianee e naboonyn, captanyn as fir-reill, 
coamrit yindyssagh stoamey, markiagh er 
cabbil, ad ooilley deiney aegey aalin. She doted 
upon the Assyrians her neighbours, captains 
and rulers clothed most gorgeously, horsemen 
riding upon horses, all of them desirable young 
men. 
cant, s. m. an auction; pl. -yn.  
yn chant, s. 6. the auction; pl. -yn. C  
cant, v. i. bid at auction; v. -agh, 77; -al, 
79. -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88. 
chant, v. did auction; -agh; -al; -in; -ins; 
-it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. C  
cantit 
s’cantit, a. how auctioned. C 
canteyder, s. m. an auctioneer, a bidder at 
an auction; pl. -yn.  
cappagh, s. m. a captive; pl. 71 [change -agh 
to -ee]. 
yn chappagh, s. 6. the captive; pl. 71. C  
dy chappee, <a. d.> of captives. C  
cappeeys, s. m. captivity; pl. -syn.  
yn chappeeys, s. the captivity. C  
cappit, 85. confined, captured.  
ro chappyt, 85. too confined. C  
cappan, s. m. a cup; pl. -yn.  
yn chappan, s. the cup; pl. -yn. C  
captan, s. m. a captain; pl. -yn.  
car, s. m. a twine, twist, or knot in timber; a 
twine, twist, a turn round; as, car ny 
65 
C 
 
bleeaney (all the year round, throughout or 
during the year); car y voghrey (all the 
morning); car y tourree (all summer); car 
yn ouyr (all harvest); car y gheuree (all 
winter). In speaking of all day or all night, 
the car is omitted, and we say, fiey laa (all 
day); and fud ny hoie (all night); pl. see 
khyr.  
yn char, s. the twist, turn, &c. C 
cayr, s. m. a knot in timber.  
khyr, s. pl. knots.  
kyr, s. pl. See k[h]yr.  
dy chyr, s. of knots. K 
car-coll, s. m. a hitch of a rope; a knot on a 
timber-head, of that tree [coll ‘hazel’], 
whence the name Coll.  
yn char-choll, s. the hitch. C  
carr, v. twist, twine, warp; -agh, 77; -al, 
79; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
char, v. -agh; -in; -ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 
94. 
charragh, v. would, &c. twist or twine. C  
carrit, 85. twisted, twined, warped.  
carit or cast [from cas, v.], 85. twisted.  
caraig or carage, s. f. a clock or beetle; pl. 
-yn. Cha boght as caraig. [As poor as a 
beetle.] 
carbyd, s. m. a bier; pl. -yn or 76 [carbid].  
yn charbyd, s. 6. the bier; pl. 76. C  
carchuillag, s. f. a fly, a gnat; pl. -yn.  
yn charchuillag, s. the fly. C  
carmeish, s. f. a canvass, a coarse sheet; pl. 
-yn.  
yn charmeish, s. the canvass. C  
carn or carnane, s. m. a heap or knob; a heap 
or pile erected in memory of a dead person, 
or of some memorable event; pl. -yn; 
(barrows).  
yn charn, s. the monument. C  
yn charnane, s. the heap, &c. C  
carnane-freeney, s. m. the head of a pin.  
carnaneagh, a. full of heaps, &c.  
s’carnanagh, a. how full of heaps. C 
s’carnanee, a. more and most full of heaps. 
C 
carnoain, s. m. a large bee or beetle.  
yn charnoain, s. the large bee. C  
carr, s. m. a tune; as, carr daunse (a tune to 
dance to); carr y phoosee (the marriage 
tune). Ta lane çhyndaaghyn ayns carr y 
phoosee. [There are many turns in the 
marriage tune.] 
yn charr, s. the tune. C  
carrag, s. f. a carious animal.  
carragh, a. affected with the scurvy or 
scabs, scabious. Te feer aasagh cur fuill ass 
kione carragh. [It’s very simple to bring 
blood out of a scabby head.] 
ro charragh, a. too carious. C  
s’carragh, a. how carious or rotten. C 
s’carree, a. id., comp. and sup. C, 
fannag charragh 
y n’hannag charragh, s. the scald crow. F 
gorley-carragh, s. the scurvy. 
carrid, s. m. cariousness, scabbedness.  
yn charrid, s. the cariousness, or cariosity. 
C  
carrage, s. f. a carrot; pl. -yn.  
yn charrage, s. the carrot. C  
carran, s. f. small white shells that grow on 
the rocks under full sea mark.  
carrane or kerrane, s. f. a sandal, a cover for 
the sole and sides of the foot made of raw 
hide, salted and dried, and laced with 
thongs of the same on the top of the foot; 
pl. -yn. The Welsh have cwaran for a shoe, 
and carrai for a shoe latchet.  
yn charrane, s. the sandal; pl. -yn. C  
carree, s. f. the scud, or small clouds that fly 
with the wind. 
carrey, s. m. a friend, a crony. Is this word 
derived from carr? (twist, twine, or warp 
—so is every friend’s heart about his 
friend’s); or from carus, Lat. (dear); pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn].  
dty charrey, s. 6. thy friend. C  
caarjyn, s. pl. friends; pl. of carrey.  
caardys, s. m. kindred, pedigree, 
genealogy.  
caarjys or caardys, s. m. relationship by 
blood, consanguinity; Neh. xiii. 4: Son roish 
shoh, va Eliashib yn saggyrt, er va currym 
66 
C 
 
shamyryn-tashtee thie’n Jee ain, caardys da 
Tobiah. And before this, Eliashib the priest, 
having the oversight of the chamber of the 
house of our God, was allied unto Tobiah.  
e chaarjys, s. his friendship. C  
caarjysagh, a. friendly, relatively.  
s’caarjyssagh, a. how friendly. C 
s’caarjyssee, a. more friendly, most 
friendly. C 
ro chaarjyssagh, a. too friendly. C  
carriads, s. f. something done unwillingly; 
high-road labour.  
yn charriads, s. the high-road labour. C  
carrick, s. f. a strong hold, a fortress, Jer. vi. 
27: Ta mee er dty hoiaghey son toor as carrick 
mastey my phobble, dy vod oo toiggal as 
prowal nyn raaidyn. I have set thee for a tower 
and a fortress among my people, that thou 
mayest know and try their way; and which, in 
former times, had water round, whence it is 
now applied to a rock in the sea; the 
chancel of the church, from its being a 
place of refuge or safety in some cases, as 
catching hold of the horns of the altar.  
yn charrick, s. the stronghold, the fortress, 
the rock in the sea.  
carree, a. d. the chancel of a church. Vod 
fir charree soie[?] (Can those that minister 
in the chancel, or at the altar, or the 
ministers of the chancel, sit[?]).  
yn charree, s. the chancel.  
carroo, s. m. a carp; pl. 73 [see below].  
karroo. See carroo.  
yn charroo, s. the carp. C  
kerriu, s. pl. carps; the pl. of carroo.  
e cherriu, s. pl. his carps. C  
cart, v. 
chart, v. did gather or rake mire; -agh; 
-aghey; -ee; -ey; -in; -ins; -it; -ym; -yms; 
-ys, 94.  
cartage, s. f. a gadder, Ecclesiasticus, xxvi. 8: 
Ta ben veshtal, as cartage ny dhieyn doostey 
lane boirey, as cha jean ee keiltyn y nearey eck 
hene. A drunken woman and a gadder abroad 
causeth great anger, and she will not cover her 
own shame. 
carthan, s. m. an insect found to have no vent 
below. Deeasee yn charthan e hoyn woish 
as cha dooar eh arragh eh. [The carthan 
lent his breech, and he got it no more.] 
cartharnee, s. f. a cannon.  
carval, s. f. a carol; pl. -yn.  
yn charval, s. 6. the carol. C  
cas, v. twist, twist thou, turn, whirl; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88,  
chas, v. did twist, twisted; -agh; -ee; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms.  
casey, v. turning, whirling, twisting; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn].  
dy chasey, v. to twist, to twine. C  
casit or cast, 85. twisted.  
s’cast, a. how twisted or twined. C 
ro chast, 85. too much twisted.  
dooan-y-chione-cast, s. f. the herb self-
heal. 
casey, s. m. twist, a. d. of winding, curling, 
or twisting, (as stairs); 1 Kings, vi. 8: Va’n 
dorrys son y chiamyr veanagh er cheu yesh y 
thie: as hie ad seose er greeshyn cassee ’sy 
chiamyr veanagh, as ass y chiamyr veanagh 
hie ad stiagh ’sy trass. The door for the middle 
chamber was in the right side of the house: and 
they went up with winding stairs into the middle 
chamber, and out of the middle into the third. 
[The citation illustrates a. d. cassee, rather 
than cas(s)ey.] 
cassee 
yeeal-chassee, s. f. a piece of thong tied 
between the handle and the rod of a flail, 
whereon it works. 
daa chassey, s. two wreaths; 2 Chron. iv. 
12: Ta shen, yn daa phillar, as ny booghyn, as 
ny atteeyn v’er kione y daa phillar, as yn daa 
chassey dy coodaghey’n daa cheeill ny 
atteeyn v’er kione ny pillaryn. To wit, the two 
pillars, and the pommels, and the chapiters 
which were on the top of the two pillars, and the 
two wreaths to cover the two pommels of the 
chapiters which were on the top of the pillars. C  
caseyder, s. m. a twister; pl. -yn.  
casag, s. f. a curl; pl. -yn.  
casagagh, a. curly, having curls.  
67 
C 
 
caslagh, s. m. a coil; pl. -yn. 
caslagh, v. would, &c. coil. [??] 
casherick, a. holy, sanctified, sacred.  
s’c<h>asherick, a. how holy or hallowed. 
C  
s’c<h>asherickey, a. id., comp. and sup. C 
Yee Chasherick, a. Holy God. C  
anchasherick, a. unholy, unsanctified, 
profane, wicked, impious. 
casherickee, v. i. sanctified, &c.  
casherickey, v. dedicating, sanctifying.  
dy chasherickey, v. to sanctify, &c. C  
casherickys, s. m. holiness, sanctity, 
sacredness, sanctification.  
e chasherickys, s. his holiness. C  
anchasherickys, s. unholiness, impiety, 
profaneness, wickedness. 
cashtal 
yn chashtal, s. the castle. C  
casley, [a.] like, resembling.  
anchasley, a. unlike, different. 
neu-chasley, a. different, unlike. 
co-c[h]asley, a. equal in likeness, alike. 
caslid, s. m. uniformity.  
caslys, s. m. likeness, resemblance; sign, or 
appearance; as, caslys scaddan (sign of 
herrings); pl. -yn.  
e chaslys, s. his likeness. C  
anchaslys, s. m. difference; pl. -yn. 
co-c[h]aslys, s. m. likeness, form, portrait. 
cass, s. f. a foot, the foot of any thing. The 
handle of various things is called cass, as of 
a spade, fork, &c.; the handle of a flail, as 
an exception, is called loaghrane, as all the 
others ought to be; pl. -yn. See trie.  
yn chass, s. the foot. C  
cassit, 85. having feet, footed.  
cass-feeagh, s. f. craws-foot, gold-knobs.  
cass-olley, s. f. hairs of old wool that 
adhere to sheep, whereby the fleece is kept 
on longer at shearing time; some will have 
it to mean caslys olley (the sign of new 
wool, or new growth); it is common to call 
leg, cass; as, cass stoyl (the foot of a stool); 
cass vrisht (a broken leg).  
cass-rooisht, a. bare-foot, bare-footed.  
far-chass, s. f. a piece put on the shaft of a 
sledge car to lengthen it when worn too 
short; a false or wooden leg or foot; pl. -yn. 
mair chass, s. f. a toe. 
mwannal cass, s. f. the small of the leg. 
ordaag-chass, s. f. a great toe; pl. 
ordaagyn-cass. 
cassagh, a. having feet; as, maase kiare 
cassagh (quadrupeds).  
chassagh, a. d. of feet. C  
kiare chassagh, a. four-footed, quadruped. 
loam-choshagh, a. bare-footed. 
skeilt-chassagh, a. cloven-footed. 
cassan, s. m. a path, a track; pl. -yn.  
yn chassan, s. the path, &c. C  
cassan-ayns-keyll, s. m. a grove.  
cassan-ny-greiney, s. m. the zodiac. 
cassanagh, a. having paths or tracks.  
s’casanagh, a. how full of paths. C 
s’cassanee, a. id., comp. and sup. C 
anchassanagh, a. trackless. 
cosh or coshey, a. d. of the foot or feet.  
chosh, a. d. of the foot or feet. C  
fo-chosh, adv. under foot, beneath, 
overcome; currit fo-chosh (subdued). 
jeh-chash, a. wild, unruly. The metaphor in 
this word is no doubt taken from jeh (of), 
and chash, or chosh (of the feet); a horse or 
other unruly beast that rears its feet off the 
ground. 
ry-chosh, adv. by the feet, by foot. 
kesmad-coshey, a foot step.  
cosh-ry-cholbey, a. going in a body 
together, walking cheek-by-jowl.  
coshagh, s. m. a pedestrian. This word is 
seldom used. See <chosee> [coshee].  
yn choshagh, s. 6. the pedestrian. This 
word or its radical is seldom used: it is the 
plural choshee that is made use of, which 
see. C  
coshee, s. m. pedestrian, foot travellers, 
foot-men. This word is used for both 
singular and plural; a. d. of travelling on 
foot.  
yn choshee, s. 6. the pedestrian or footman. 
This ought to be the plural of choshagh. C  
coshee-ghorley, s. pl. travellers that have 
some ailment in their feet, lame travellers.  
e choshee-ghorley, s. his maim footed. C  
coshee-rooisht, s. pl. barefeet or barefooted 
travellers.  
68 
C 
 
e choshee-rooisht, his bare footed 
travellers. 
coshal, s. f. a treadle; pl. -yn.  
yn choshal, s. the treadle. C 
codjal, s. m. a treadle; pl. -yn. See coshal.  
cosheeaght, s. m. the action of walking. 
Goll ayns cosheeaght hionn (going in quick 
pace).  
e chosheeaght, s. his speed in walking. C  
cassid 
dy chasid, v. to accuse. C  
cooyl-cassid, v. backbiting; <Rom. i. 30> 
[See below cooyl-cassidagh]. 
yn chasidagh, s. the accuser; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee]. C  
cooyl-cassidagh, s. m. a backbiter; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]; [Rom. i. 30: 
Cooylchasseydee, noidyn Yee, roonee, 
moyrnee, boggyssee, gientyn reddyn olk, mee-
viallee da ayraghyn as moiraghyn. Backbiters, 
haters of God, despiteful, proud, boasters, 
inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents.] 
casseyder or casseydagh, s. m. an accuser; 
pl. -yn, 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
cassey-foalsey, s. m. a false accuser.  
cast, v. i. quell, defeat; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
chast, v. did quell or conquer; -agh; -ee; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94, C  
castey, v. quelling, defeating; 2 Sam. xvii. 
14: Son veih’n Chiarn ve dy chastey coyrle 
chreeney Ahitophel, dy chooilleeney er 
Absalom yn olk va’n Chiarn er chiarail n’oï. For 
the Lord had appointed to defeat the good 
counsel of Ahithophel, to the intent that the 
Lord might bring evil upon Absalom.  
dy chastey, v. to quell, &c. C  
castit, 85. quelled, defeated, turned off.  
s’castit, a. how quelled or overcome. C 
ro chastit, 85. too quelled, &c. C  
yn chasteyder, s. the queller, &c. C  
castrecair, a. in a tolerable way, passable.  
cathair, s. f. a chair; Gal. pl. -yn.  
Catreeney, s. f. Catharine.  
Laa’l Chatreeney, s. Catharine’s day. C  
caulg, s. f. the awns of barley, the hards or 
shoves of flax.  
yn chaulg, s. the awns, &c. C  
caulgagh, a. having awns or hards.  
s’calgagh, a. full of awns. C 
s’calgee, a. more and most full of awns. C 
cay 
yn chay, s. the quay. C  
cayr, s. f. a car. 
khyr, s. pl. cars.  
cayrn, s. m. a trumpet, a horn to blow, a 
bugle. 
yn chayrn, s. the trumpet. C  
cayrn, v. blow or sound the trumpet; -agh, 
77; -al, 79; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 
86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
chayrn, v. did blow the trumpet; -agh; -al; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. C  
cayrnit, 85. blown, sounded.  
cayrnee 
fir chayrnee, s. trumpeters. C  
cayrneyder, s. m. a blower, &c.  
yn chayrneyder, s. the trumpeter. C  
ce 
c’el, adv. where, a contraction of cre vel.  
c’hon, adv. what for, why; a contraction of 
cre-hon.  
c’raad, adv. where; a contraction of cre 
and raad.  
c’red, <adv.> [pro.] (cre red) what, 
literally what thing.  
c’woad, <adv.> [a., pro.] how many or 
how much. This is a contraction of cre 
woad. 
cre, pro. what; in conversation too often 
pronounced ke; it sometimes is an adverb, 
and means how, as cre choud (how far, 
how long).  
que, pro. what. Now written cre. 
cre-ec, adv. what at, why, at what.  
cre-erbee, <adv.> [pro.] whatever, 
whatsoever.  
cre’n-fa, adv. wherefore, why, literally 
what for; a contraction of cre yn fa.  
cre[’]n-fa-nagh, adv. why not, wherefore 
not.  
cre[’]n-oyr, adv. for what cause.  
cre-saillym, <adv.> [pro.] what I please; -s, 
id.  
cre-sailt, <adv.> [pro.] what thou pleasest; 
69 
C 
 
-s, id.  
cre-silliu, <adv.> [pro.] what you please or 
what is your pleasure.  
cre-theihll, <adv.> [pro.] whatever, where 
ever.  
cre-veih or cre-voish, adv. from whence, 
where from, or from where.  
cre vel, adv. where is, what is. This word is 
often spoken c’el.  
cre-wheesh, <adv.> [a.] how big or how 
great.  
cre-whelleen, <adv.> [a.] how many. The 
ee in the last syllable is to be sounded as i. 
cre-woad, <adv.> [a., pro.] how much.  
cre-woad-share, <adv.> [a., pro.] how 
much better.  
cre-woad-sloo, <adv.> [a., pro.] how much 
less.  
cre-woad-smoo, <adv.> [a., pro.] how 
much more.  
ceab, s. m. a clod or lump of earth.  
yn cheab, s. 6. the clod. C  
ceabbagh, a. (or cabbagh, as it is usually 
sounded), claddy, full of clods, or small 
masses of earth; s. m. land is so called the 
second year after being ploughed, from lea; 
perhaps in consequence of its rising in 
clods.  
yn cheabagh, s. the cloddy land. C  
ceau, v. wear, cast, upbraid, spending; 
raining, casting past; 1 Peter, i. 17: As my ta 
shiu genmys eshyn nyn Ayr, ta fegooish jannoo 
soiagh jeh persoonyn, briwnys cordail rish 
obbyr dy chooilley ghooinney, ceau-jee earish 
nyn droailtys ayns shoh ayns aggle. And if ye 
call on the Father, who without respect of 
persons judgeth according to every man’s 
work, pass the time of your sojourning here in 
fear; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cheau, v. did cast, wear, &c.; it is also used 
for did rain; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 
94. C  
ceauit or ceaut, 85. worn, cast, cast away, 
spent; Rom. xiii. 12: Ta’n oie foddey ceaut, 
ta’n laa er-gerrey. The night is far spent, the 
day is at hand.  
s’ceaut, a. how worn, cast, or thrown. C 
ro cheauit, or cheaut, 85. too much worn, 
&c. C  
ceaueyder, s. m. a wearer, &c.  
ceelyn, s. m. ceiling; 1 Kings, vi. 15: As hrog 
eh voallaghyn y thie cheu-sthie lesh buird-
cedar, chammah laare y thie as ceelyn ny 
voallaghyn: as choodee eh ad er cheu-sthie 
lesh fuygh, as choodee eh laare y thie lesh 
plankyn-juys. And he built the walls of the 
house within with boards of cedar, both the 
floor of the house, and the walls of the ceiling: 
and he covered them on the inside with wood, 
and covered the floor of the house with planks 
of fir.  
cha, adv. not. For the sound that the ch has in 
this word, see remark 6; and all the words 
which follow commencing with ch have the 
same aspiration, unless noticed to the 
contrary by the insertion of the figure 5. 
Cha is always placed before verbs to make 
negatives, as we have not a Manks word for 
no; it is used as, cha beagh (would not be); 
cha liass (need not); cha vel (is not or are 
not); cha row (was not), &c.  
 Cha is often improperly used for as and 
so. See Manks Scriptures, Josh. viii. 19; 2 
Sam. xxii. 45; Psl. xviii. 45, and lviii. 3; Ex. 
ii. 18; Job, xlii. 15, &c, &c., &c. If cho had 
been substituted for cha, in these latter 
instances, I think it would have been much 
better. [See cho.] 
chamoo, conj. neither, not either, not more.  
çhaggyl, v. 5. assemble; Ez. xxxix. 17: 
Chaggle-jee shiu hene, as tar-jee cooidjagh 
er dagh cheu, gys yn oural aym’s, shen ta 
mee dy hebbal er nyn son, eer oural mooar er 
sleityn Israel, dy vod shiu gee yn eill, as giu yn 
uill. Assemble yourselves, and come; gather 
yourselves on every side to my sacrifice that I 
do sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice 
upon the mountains of Israel, that ye may eat 
flesh, and drink blood. <Ch.>  
cha jagl* or jaggil, v. not gather; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. Ch  
çhaglys, v. 5. shall, &c. gather.  
hagl or haggil, v. did gather or gathered; 
Ex. xvi. 18: As tra howse ad eh lesh omer, 
cha row veg harrish echeysyn ren mooarane y 
70 
C 
 
haglym, as ersyn haggil cooid y veggan, cha 
row dolley: ren dy chooilley ghooinney 
chaglym rere feme e hie. And when they did 
mete it with an omer, he that gathered much 
had nothing over, and he that gathered little 
had no lack; they gathered every man 
according to his eating. Ch  
çhaglym, v. 5. gathering together.  
çhaggley, v. 5. gather, gather together.  
dy hagley or haglym, v. to gather. Ch  
çhaglit, 85. 5. gathered, assembled.  
neu-çhaglit, a. 5. ungathered. [?l. neu-
haglit] 
çhaglym, s. a collection, a contribution; 
Rom. xv. 26: Son s’gooidsave lhieusyn jeh 
Macedonia as Achaia, dy yannoo chaglym 
ennagh son ny Creesteenyn boghtey ta ec 
Jerusalem. For it hath pleased them of 
Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain 
contribution for the poor saints which are at 
Jerusalem.  
çhagh, s. m. [5]. a hiding place; Nah. ii. 11, 
12: C’raad ta oayll ny lionyn, as chagh ny 
lionyn aegey? raad ren y lion, eer y chenn lion 
shooyl, as quallian y lion, as cha row eh ayns 
dooinney erbee dy chur aggle orroo. Ren y lion 
raipey nyn saie son e whuallianyn, as stroie 
son e lionyn bwoirryn as lhieen eh yn chagh 
echey lesh cragh, as ny ooigyn echey lesh 
convayrtyn. Where is the dwelling of the lions, 
and the feedingplace of the young lions, where 
the lion, even the old lion, walked, and the 
lion’s whelp, and none made them afraid? The 
lion did tear in pieces enough for his whelps, 
and strangled for his lionesses, and filled his 
holes with prey, and his dens with ravin.  
çhaghter, s. m. 5. a messenger; pl. -yn.  
e haghter, s. his messenger. Ch  
nyn jaghter, s. your, &c. messenger. Ch  
çhaghteraght, s. m. 5. a message; pl. -yn.  
e haghteraght, s. his message. Ch  
nyn jaghteraght, s. your, &c. message. Ch  
çhaghter-reeoil, s. m. 5. an ambassador.  
chaie, a. d. the other, the change; as, laa 
chaie (the other day).  
laa-chaie, s. the other day. This chaie 
comes from caghlaa (change), the change 
of a day. 
çharbaa, v. 5. weaning. This word and its 
derivatives are sounded as ch in charter, 
(English); -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
çharbaaee, a. d. 5. of weaning.  
cha jarbaa, v. not wean; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms, 94. Ch  
harbaa, v. did wean or weaned; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. Ch  
 
çharbait 
s’çharbaït, a. how weaned. Ch 
ro harbait, 85. too weaned. Ch  
çhea v. 5. fleeing, retreating: -agh, 77; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
nyn jea, v. your &c., fleeing or retreating. 
Ch 
cha jea, v. not flee or retreat. Ch  
hea, v. did flee, fled; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. Ch  
dy hea, v. to flee, shun, or retreat. Ch  
er-çhea, v. fleeing, fled; roie-er-çhea 
(retreating). 
çheb or çhebb*, v. 5. bid or offer; -agh, 77; 
-al, 79; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88; s. m. a bid, or offer  
heb or hebb*, v. offered, did offer, bade or 
did bid; -agh; -in; -ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 
94. Ch  
cha jeb or jebb*, v. not bid or offer; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. Ch  
dy hebbal, v. to bid, offer or proffer. Ch  
nyn jebbal, v. your, &c. offering or 
bidding. 
çhebbit, pl. 5. bidden, offered, bade.  
çhebbeyder, s. m. 5. a bidder, an offerer.  
çhee, v. 5. seeking; Luke, xi. 24: Tra ta’n 
spyrryd neu-ghlen er gholl ass dooinney, t’eh 
shooyll trooid faasaghyn fadaneagh, chee 
aash, agh ayns fardail, eisht t’eh gra, Hem 
reesht gys my hie, veih haink mee. When the 
unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh 
through dry places, seeking rest; and finding 
none, he saith, I will return unto my house 
whence I came out.  
er-çhee-goll, adv. about to go; er-çhee dy 
yannoo (about to do, about to act). 
71 
C 
 
çheer, s. f. country; pl. -aghyn.  
e heer, s. his country; pl. -aghyn. Ch  
nyn jeer, s. your &c. country; pl. -aghyn. 
Ch  
çheerey, a. d. 5. of a country.  
balley-beg-çheerey, s. m. a village. 
dooinney-çheerey, s. m. a countryman. 
çheer, v. 5. dry with heat or fire; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -ey, 82; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha jeer, v. not dry by fire or heat; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94.  
heer, v. dried, did dry with fire, &c.; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. Ch  
çheerey, v. 
dy heerey, v. to dry by heat of fire. Ch  
nyn jeerey, s. your, &c. drying. Ch  
çheerit, or çheert, 85. 5. dried by fire.  
ro heert, 85. too dried. Ch  
çheerey, s. m. 5. torrefaction, drying; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn].  
çheeree, a. d. 5. of torrefaction or drying. 
çheereyder, s. m. 5. one who dries.  
nyn jeereyder, s. your, &c. drier. Ch  
çheet, v. 5. coming. 
çheet dy ve, becoming, to become.  
er jeet, v. hath, &c. come, arrived. Ch  
er-jeet, pt. hath, &c. come or arrived.  
dy heet, v. to come. Dy heet er-ash, v. is to 
appear. Ch 
nyn jeet, s. your &c. coming, arrival. Ch  
ry-heet, v. to come, being to come. 
çheet-magh-ollish, s. f. 5. perspiration.  
çheet-er-y-hoshiaght, v. 5. coming 
forward, prospering, gaining in any thing.  
çheet-stiagh, s. m. 5. an income; pl. -yn.  
 
hig or higg*, v. will or wilt, shall or shalt 
come; -ym; -yms. Ch  
jigym, p. will I come? -s, id. em.  
jig oo, p. wilt thou come? The answer in 
the affirmative would be hig; in the 
negative cha jig.  
haink, v. came, did come, became. Ch  
 
tar, v. come, come away. This word, I 
think, is derived from taare or tayr (catch), 
and not from çheet (come). 
my harr* or harragh, v. if go or come; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms, 94. C  
harrin, [v.] I would go or come. See roin. 
Ch  
çheh, a. 5. hot, calid, warm; Rev. iii. 15: 
Shione dou dty obbraghyn, nagh vel oo edyr 
feayr ny cheh: baill-ym dy beagh oo edyr feayr 
ny cheh. I know thy works, that thou art neither 
cold nor hot: I would thou wert cold or hot.  
ro heh, a. too hot, too warm. Ch  
s’çhoe, a. warmer, warmest; hotter, hottest; 
the comp. and sup. of çheh. C 
çhia, a. 5. See çheh.  
çhiass, s. 5. calidity, heat, warmth. 
dy hiass, s. of heat or warmth. Ch  
blaa-hiass, s. m. lukewarmth. 
çhiass vleeaney, a. the heat of the year. B 
yn çhiassagh or çhiassaghey, s. m. 5. the 
fever  
çhiasseyder, s. m. 5. a heater; pl. -yn. 
cheilley ‘one another’ 
dy cheilley, adv. together, joined.  
lurg-y-che[i]lley, adv. 6. after one another.  
fud-y-ch[ei]lley, adv. through others, 
mixed. 
cab[-]ry-cheilley, s. f. a pair of scissors. 
coyrt-dy-cheilley, v. joining. 
fo-my-cheilley, adv. through others, 
subverting; 2 Tim. ii. 14: Jeh ny reddyn shoh 
cur ad ayns cooinaghtyn, coyrt currym orroo 
kiongoyrt rish y Chiarn, nagh streeu ad mysh 
focklyn nagh vel gys veg yn ymmyd, agh dy 
choyrt sleih fo-my-cheilley. Of these things put 
them in remembrance, charging them before 
the Lord that they strive not about words to no 
profit, but to the subverting of the hearers. 
fud-y-cheilley, adv. mixed through others. 
kione y cheilley, adv. through others, 
mixed. 
lesh-y-cheilley, adv. one with another. 
my-cheilley, a. continuous, together. 
veih my cheilley, adv. asunder. 
ry-cheilley, adv. together, stuck together. 
goll-ry-cheilley, adv. like one another, 
alike. 
neu-gholl[-]ry[-]cheilley, a. dissimilar. 
çheinjean, s. m. 5. a bonfire; pl. -yn.  
72 
C 
 
çhelleeragh, adv. 5. directly, immediately, 
forthwith, straightway, without delay, 
straight forward.  
s’çhilleeragh (sic: stress), a. how direct or 
strait forward. C  
s’çhilleeree (sic: stress), a. id., comp. and 
sup. C 
çhelleerid, s. m. 5. directness, &c.  
çhemmal 
yn çhemmal, s. 5. the hem.  
çhengey, s. f. 5. tongue; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
e hengey, s. his tongue. Ch  
nyn jengey, s. your, &c. tongue; pl. 67. Ch  
çhengey-ny-mraane. See cron-craaee 
[‘aspen tree’].  
lus y çhengey veg, s. f. mouse-ear. 
çhenjagh, s. 
yn çhenjagh, s. m. 5. the extortioner; Isa. 
xvi. 4: Lhig da ny eebyrtee aym’s cummal 
mayrt’s, Voab: bee uss scaa dauesyn veih 
eddin y spooilleyder: son ta’n chenjagh ec 
kione, ta’n cragheyder harrish, ta ny tranlaasee 
stroit ass y cheer. Let mine outcasts dwell with 
thee, Moab; be thou a covert to them from the 
face of the spoiler: for the extortioner is at an 
end, the spoiler ceaseth, the oppressors are 
consumed out of the land.  
çhent, s. m. 5. a flash; pl. -yn; Ez. i. 14: As 
roie ny cretooryn bio, as hyndaa ad goll-rish 
chentyn-taarnee. And the living creatures ran 
and returned as the appearance of a flash of 
lightning.  
çherr, v. 
cha jerr* or jerree, v. not perish; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -yms, 94. Ch  
çherraghtyn 
dy herraghtyn, v. to perish. Ch 
er jerraghtyn, v. hath, &c, &c. perished. 
Ch  
çhesh-vean 
sy çhesh-vean, s. 5. in the exact middle.  
çheu, s. f. 5. side. This word differs from 
lhiattee, also side; as it would be improper 
to say, er y lhiattee echey (for one who was 
on a man’s side); we therefore say, er y 
çheu echey. Çheu-heear (west side), is 
sometimes used for behind; çheu-hiar (east 
side).  
e heu, s. his side; derrey heu (one side). Ch 
nyn jeu, s. your, &c. side. Ch  
çheu-asstan, the side out of sight. 
çheu-mooie, s. m. outside, besides, except; 
Acts, viii. 1: …as v’ad ooilley er nyn skeayley 
magh trooid cheeraghyn Yudea as Samaria, 
cheu mooie jeh ny ostyllyn. …and they were 
all scattered abroad throughout the regions of 
Judaea and Samaria, except the apostles.  
çheu-sthie, s. m. 5. inside. There is a very 
improper change of the word çheu to lheu 
on the south-side of the Island.  
çhiamble s. f. 5. a temple; pl. -yn.  
e hiamble, s. his temple. Ch 
çhiamyr, s. 5. the chamber; 1 Kings, vi. 6: 
Va’n chiamyr s’inshley queig cubityn er lheead, 
as va’n chiamyr meanagh shey cubityn er 
lheead, as va’n trass shiaght cubityn er lheead. 
The nethermost chamber was five cubits broad, 
and the middle was six cubits broad, and the 
third was seven cubits broad. S 
çhiarn, s. m. 5. lord.  
e hiarn, s. his lord; pl. -yn. Ch 
nyn Jiarn, s. our, &c. Lord. Ch  
moyll y Çhiarn, in. hallelujah. 
çhiarnagh, a. lordly.  
çhiarnid, s. m. lordliness.  
çhiarnys, s. m. lordship, dominion; Mat. 
xx. 25: Agh deïe Yeesey orroo huggey, as 
dooyrt eh, Ta fys eu dy vel princeyn ny 
Hashoonee gymmyrkey chiarnys harrystoo, as 
ta ny ard-gheiney gymmyrkey reill orroo. But 
Jesus called them unto him, and said, Ye know 
that the princes of the Gentiles exercise 
dominion over them, and they that are great 
exercise authority upon them.  
e hiarnys, s. his lordship; pl. -syn. Ch 
çhiarrey, s. m. 5. dry weather after rain; Pro. 
xxv. 23: Ta’n gheay-twoaie cur lesh chiarrey; 
myr shen ta eddin fargagh cur ny-host yn 
chengey chooyl-chassee. The north wind 
driveth away rain: so doth an angry 
countenance a backbiting tongue.  
çharrey, s. m. 5. dry weather after rain.  
73 
C 
 
çhibbyr, s. f. 5. a well, a spring of water.  
çhibbraghyn, s. pl. 5. wells, springs.  
e hibbyr, s. his well; pl. -aghyn. Ch 
nyn jibbyr, s. your, &c. well. Ch  
Laa’l Çhybbyr-Ushtey, s. m. Epiphany-
day. This ought to be Laa’l çhebbal 
ooashley, the day of offering worship, as 
the wise men of the East did, of which it is 
a commemoration. 
çhibbyragh, a. d. 5. of a well or wells.  
chied, <adv.> [a.] first, foremost. 
çhing, s. m. 5. a sore, an ulcer; a. sick, ill.  
s’çhing, a. how sick or ill. Ch 
s’çhingey, a. id., comp. and sup. Ch 
ro hing, a. too sick, too ill. Ch 
e hing, s. his sore; pl. -yn. Ch  
nyn jing, s. your, &c. sore. Ch  
çhingey, a. pl. 5. sick, ill, disordered.  
çhingey-jee, s. f. 5. a ringworm; pl. 
çhingaghyn-jee. 
çhingys, s. 5. sickness, illness; pl. -yn.  
dty hingys, s. thy sickness. Ch  
nyn jingys, s. your, &c. sickness, illness. 
Ch  
chioee, adv. never.  
çhiolg, s. 5. stomach or guts.  
blennick-çholgey, id. A corruption of 
bolgey [sc. blennick çhiolgey ‘fat of the 
guts’ ?] 
lus y çhiolg, s. f. golden maiden hair. 
çhiollagh, s. 5. hearth or fire place.  
dty hiollagh, s. thy hearth; pl. -yn. Ch  
nyn jiollagh, s. your, &c. hearth. Ch 
çhiollee, a. d. 5. of the hearth, as keeil-
çhiollee (the fire side or hearth side).  
keeil çhiollee, s. hearth side, or fire side. 
hiollee, a. d. of the hearth. Ch 
çhionn, v. 5. tighten, fasten, or straiten; -agh, 
77; -ey, 82; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 
86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
hio[nn], v. did tighten, straiten, or fasten; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. Ch 
cha jion or jionn*, v. not tighten; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms, 94. Ch 
dy hionney, v. to tighten, straiten, &c. Ch  
nyn jionney, v. your, &c. tightening, 
straitening; 2 Cor. vi. 12: Cha vel shiuish er 
nyn jionney ayninyn, agh ta shiuish chionnit 
ayns ny creeaghyn eu hene. Ye are not 
straitened in us, but ye are straitened in your 
own bowels.  
çhionnt, 85. 5. tightened, straitened.  
s’çhionnit or s’çhiont, 85. how tightened 
or straitened. C 
ro hionnt, 85. too tightened, &c. Ch 
çhionn, a. 5. fast, speedy; hardly.  
çhionney, a. pl. 5. strait, tight, fast. 
s’çhionn, a. how tight, fast, strait. C 
s’çhenney, a. the comp. and sup. of çhion, 
tighter, tightest; faster, fastest; straiter, 
straitest; Acts, xxvi. 5: Bione daue mee er-
dyn toshiaght (my yinnagh ad feanish y 
ymmyrkey) lurg yn aght schenney jeh’n 
chredjue ain, dy ren mee baghey my Pharisee. 
Which knew me from the beginning, if they 
would testify, that after the most straitest sect of 
our religion I lived a Pharisee. C 
yn çhennar (sic: stress), 5. (from çhion), 
the strait passage.  
çhennid, s. m. 5. tightness, straitness, 
distress.  
çhennid vooar, a. a great strait; 1 Chron. 
xxi. 13: As dooyrt David rish Gad, Ta mee 
ayns chennid vooar: lhig dou nish tuittym fo 
laue’n Chiarn, (son s’mooar ta e vyghinyn) agh 
ny lhig dou tuittym ayns laue dooinney. And 
David said unto Gad, I am in a great strait: let 
me fall now into the hand of the Lord; for very 
great are his mercies: but let me not fall into the 
hand of man. M  
e hennid, s. his straitness, tightness, 
distress. Ch  
nyn jennid, s. your, &c. straitness, &c. Ch  
çhiow, v. 5. warm, warming, heating; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88; s. a warming.  
çhiowee, a. d. 5. of warming, heating, &c.  
hiow, v. did warm, warmed; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. Ch  
cha jiow, v. not warm or heat; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms, 94. Ch 
çhiowt, 85. warmed, heated.  
s’çhiowit or s’çh[i]owt, a. how warmed. C 
çhioweyder, s. m. a warmer; pl. -yn.  
74 
C 
 
çhiu, a. 5. thick, dense, gross, close.  
çhioo, a. 5. thick. See also çhiu.  
s’çhioo or s’çhiu, a. how thick or dense. C 
s’çhee, a. the comp. and sup. of çhiu. Prov. 
“Ta fuill ny s’çhee na ushtey.” [Blood is 
thicker than water.] C 
s’çheey, a. pl. the comp. and sup. of çhiu, 
when speaking in the plural number. C 
ro hiu, a. too thick, dense, &c. Ch 
çhiu, v. 
hiu, v. did thicken or condense. Ch  
çhiuchey, v. thickening.  
dy hiuchey, v. to thicken or condense. Ch 
er jiughey, v. hath, &c. thickened. Ch  
çheeid, s. 5. thickness, density.  
e heeid, s. his thickness. Ch  
çhiu, s. m. a chew. 
çhiu, v. chew; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
çhiuit, 85. cut or chewed.  
cho, adv. so, as; cho leah (as soon), &c. 
Cha is often improperly used for as and so. 
See Manks Scriptures, Josh. viii. 19: As 
hrog ny deiney va nyn lhie cooyl-chlea dy 
tappee orroo ass nyn follaghyn, as roie ad cha 
leah as v'eh er heeyney magh e laue. And the 
ambush arose quickly out of their place, and 
they ran as soon as he had stretched out his 
hand;  
2 Sam. xxii. 45: Nee joarreeyn ginjillaghey ad-
hene hym: cha leah's chlinnys ad, ver ad 
biallys dou. Strangers shall submit themselves 
unto me: as soon as they hear, they shall be 
obedient unto me;  
Psl. xviii. 45: Cha leah as chlynnys ad jee'm, 
ver ad biallys dou: agh nee'n chloan yoarree 
foalsaght rhym. As soon as they hear of me, 
they shall obey me: the strangers shall humble 
themselves before me;  
Psl. lviii. 3: Ta ny mee-chrauee frourtagh, dy 
jarroo veih breïn nyn mayrey: cha leah as t'ad 
er nyn ruggey, t'ad goll er-shaghryn, as loayrt 
breagyn. The ungodly are froward, even from 
their mother's womb: as soon as they are born, 
they go astray, and speak lies;  
Ex. ii. 18: As tra haink ad gys Reuel nyn ayr, 
dooyrt eh, Kys te dy vel shiu er jeet cha leah 
jiu? And when they came to Reuel their father, 
he said, How is it that ye are come so soon to 
day?;  
Job, xlii. 15: As ayns ooilley'n cheer cha row 
mraane erbee ry-akin cha aalin as inneenyn 
Yob: as hug nyn ayr daue eiraght mastey nyn 
mraaraghyn. And in all the land were no 
women found so fair as the daughters of Job: 
and their father gave them inheritance among 
their brethren; &c, &c, &c.  
If cho had been substituted for cha, in these 
latter instances, I think it would have been 
much better. 
chammah, adv. (from cho-mie), as well. 
çhoor 
mooirçhoor, s. m. a wreck; pl. -aghyn. 
mooirçhoor, v. -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
chor, s. possible haste; Acts, xx. 16: …son 
v’eh ayns preish siyr, er dy chooilley chor dy ve 
ec Jerusalem er laa ny Kingeesh. …for he 
hasted, if it were possible for him, to be at 
Jerusalem the day of Pentecost. Is this word 
from siyr ? S. [Surely the same chor as in 
er chor erbee ‘anywise, at all costs’. Cf. 
Acts, xviii. 21: Shegin dooys er dy chooilley 
chor yn feailley shoh ta er-gerrey y reayll ec 
Jerusalem. I must by all means keep this feast 
that cometh in Jerusalem.] 
choud, adv. as far, while, whilst, till, as long; 
-s. id. em; Prov. “Bwoaill choud as ta’n 
yiarn çheh.” [Strike while the iron is hot.] 
co-choud, adv. equidistant, equally far. 
çhymlee, s. f. 5. the chimney; pl. -yn.  
çhymmey, s. m. 5. compassion; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn].  
dy hymmey, s. of compassion. Ch  
nyn jymmey, s. your, &c, compassion. Ch  
e veeghyn dy hymmey, s. his bowels of 
compassion; 1 John, iii. 17: Agh quoi-erbee 
ta cooid y theihll shoh echey, as fakin e vraar 
ayns feme as ta dooney seose e veeghyn dy 
hymmey voish; kys ta graih Yee tannaghtyn 
ayn? But whoso hath this world’s good, and 
seeth his brother have need, and shutteth up 
his bowels of compassion from him, how 
dwelleth the love of God in him? M 
çhymmeydagh, s. m. 5. a compassionate 
75 
C 
 
person; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
çhymmoil, a. 5. compassionate.  
ro hymmoil, a. too compassionate. Ch. 
çhymmylt, s. m. 5. a foreskin. 1 Sam. xviii. 
25: Cha vel y ree shirrey toghyr erbee, agh 
keead chymmylt jeh ny Philistinee, dy ghoaill 
cooilleeney er noidyn y ree. The king desireth 
not any dowry, but an hundred foreskins of the 
Philistines, to be avenged of the king’s 
enemies.  
nyn jymmilt, s. your, &c. circumcision. Ch 
çhymmyltagh, s. m. 5. a circumcised 
person.  
nyn jymmyltagh, s. a circumcised person; 
pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]; Jer. ix. 26: Er 
Egypt, as Judah, as Edom, as cloan Ammon, 
as Moab, as ooilley ny t’ayns ny corneilyn 
sodjey-magh, ta cummal ’syn aasagh: son ta 
ooilley ny ashoonyn shoh nyn jymmyltee, as ta 
ooilley thie Israel nyn jymmyltee ayns cree. 
Egypt, and Judah, and Edom, and the children 
of Ammon, and Moab, and all that are in the 
utmost corners, that dwell in the wilderness: for 
all these nations are uncircumcised, and all the 
house of Israel are uncircumcised in the heart. 
Ch  
çhymmyltit, 85. 5. circumcised.  
çhymn or çhymnee, v. 5. will or bequeath, 
commend or devise; -agh, 77; -ee, 80.  
hymn, v. did will or bequeath, &c.; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. Ch  
my hymnagh, v. if would, &c. will, 
bequeath, commend. Ch  
çhymney, v. devising, bequeathing.  
dy hymney, v. to bequeath or commend. Ch  
çhymney, s. m. 5. a will or testament; pl. 
67 [change -ey to -aghyn]. 
nyn jymney, s. your, &c. will. See also 
jimney. Ch  
nyn jimney, s. your, &c. will, pl. 67. Ch  
çhymnee, a. d. 5. of a will or testament; as, 
feanish çhymnee.  
çhymneyder, s. m. 5. a testator, bequeather  
çhyms or çhymsee, v. 5. gather; -agh, 77; 
-aghey, 82; -in, 83; -ins; 84; -ym, 85; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
hyms* or hymsee, v. did gather, gathered; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. Ch 
cha jyms or jymsee, v. not gather; -agh, 
77. Ch  
dy hymsagh or hymsaghey, v. to gather 
together, to accumulate. Ch  
nyn jymsagh, v. your, &c. gathering. Ch  
er jymsaghey, v. hath, &c. gathered. Ch  
çhymsit 
s’çhymsit, a. how gathered. Ch 
ro hymsit, 85. too gathered together. Ch 
çhymseyder 
e hymseyder, s. his accumulator, &c. Ch  
çhymsagh, a. 
s’çhymsagh, a. how much for gathering. C 
s’çhymsee, a. id., comp. and sup. C 
çhymsagh, s. f. 5. a gathering, a sore.  
çhyndaa, v. 5. turn; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86.  
hyndaa, v. did turn, turned; -gh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. Ch  
cha jyndaa, v. not turn.; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms, 94. Ch  
dy hyndaa, v. to turn, to return. Ch  
çhyndaït, 85. 5. turned, translated.  
s’çhyndaait, a. how turned or converted. C 
ro hyndaït, 85. too much turned. Ch  
çhyndaa, s. 
nyn jyndaaghyn, s. your, &c. turns.  
çhyrrym, a. 5. dry, arid.  
çhirmey, a. pl. arid, dry.  
çhyrmey, a. pl. 5. dry, arid.  
s’çhirm, a. how dry, how arid. C 
s’çhirmey, a. id., comp. and sup. C 
ro hyrrym, a. too dry or arid. Ch  
çhirm or çhirrym, v. 5. dry; -agh, 77; 
-aghey, 82; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins. 84.  
çhyrm, or çhyrmee, v. 5. dry or make dry.  
cha jyrm* or jyrmee, v. not dry; -agh.  
hyrm* or hyrmee, v. did dry, dried; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. Ch  
çhyrmaghey, v. 5. drying.  
dy hyrmagh or hyrmaghey, v. to dry. Ch  
er jyrmaghey, hath, &c. dried. Ch  
çhirmee, a. d. of aridity or drying.  
çhyrmee, a. d. 5. of drying or dryness.  
çhirmit, 85. dried, drained of moisture.  
çhyrmit, 85. 5. dried, absorbed.  
s’çhirmit, a. how dried. C 
ro hyrmit, 85. too dried. Ch 
76 
C 
 
çhirmeyder, s. m. a drier.  
çhyrmeyder, s. m. 5. a dryer, an absorbent.  
çhirmid, s. m. dryness, drought.  
çhyrmid, s. m. 5. dryness, drought.  
e hyrmid, s. his dryness. Ch 
nyn jyrmid, s. your, &c. dryness. Ch  
çhyrrys, s. 5. a tour or journey. [See tyrrys.] 
nyn jyrrys, s. your, &c. tour, &c. Ch  
claare, s. m. a dish; pl. -eyn <or 71>.  
yn chlaare, s. the dish; pl. -eyn. C  
claasagh 
yn chlaasagh, s. the harp; pl. -yn [? or 71 
change -agh to -ee]. C  
clabbagh 
bainney clabbagh, curdled or sour milk. 
clabbinagh, a. squally, gusty.  
feer chlabbinagh, a. very squally. C 
s’clabbinagh, a. how gusty, squally, &c. C 
s’clabbinee, a. id., comp. and sup. C 
clabbini[d], s. m. squalliness.  
yn chlabbinid, s. the squalliness. C 
claddagh, s. m. the bank of a river [pl. 72 
claddeeyn]. Perhaps this word would be 
more properly clattagh, as it may be 
derived from clat (a rod).  
yn chladdagh, s. the marshy bank. C 
clag or clagg, s. m. a bell, a clock.  
yn chlagg, s. the bell or clock. C 
cluig, s. pl. bells, clocks. 
clag-merriu, s. a knell.  
yn chlaggan, s. the small bell or clock. C 
clagh, s. f. a stone; pl. -yn.  
yn chlagh, s. the stone; pl. -yn. C  
cloaie a. d. of stone or stones; Prov. 
“Brishys accyrys trooid boallaghyn 
cloaie.” [Hunger will break through stone 
walls.]  
chloaie, a. d. of a stone or stones. C  
clagh-bliehmeayn, s. a grindstone.  
clagh-chruin, s. a pebble.  
clagh-oaie, s. a gravestone.  
clagh-rubban, s. a rubbing stone.  
clagh-shleeuee, s. a whetstone.  
clagh-wyllin, s. a millstone.  
clagh-y-tooill, s. the apple of the eye.  
seyir-clagh, s. m. a mason; Galic. 
clagh, v. stone; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -ey, 82; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84: -ym, 86.  
chlagh, v. did stone, stoned; -agh, &c. C  
claghey, v. stoning, casting stones on.  
dy chlaghey, v. to stone. C 
claghit, 85. stoned.  
clagheyder, s. a stoner, one who stones.  
yn chlagheyder, s. the stoner. C 
claghagh, a. stony, full of stones.  
ro chlaghagh, a. too stony or full of stones. 
C  
s’claghagh, a. how stony. C 
s’claghee, a. id., comp. and sup. C 
claghyn-cloie, s. the bird stonechatter.  
claghyn-geayl, s. the stone, or what is 
termed gravel in the bladder.  
claight, s. m. a plait or fold; pl. -yn. 
yn chlaight, s. the plait or fold. C  
claight, v. plait or braid; -agh, 77; -ee, 80.  
s’claightit, a. how plaited. C 
claigin, s. the scalp of the head, the part of the 
head the hair grows on.  
yn chlaigin, s. the scalp or top of the skull; 
Jud. ix. 53: Agh cheau ben dy row peesh dy 
chlagh wyllin er kione Abimelech, as vrish ee 
dy peeshyn e chlaigin. And a certain woman 
cast a piece of a millstone upon Abimelech’s 
head, and all to brake his skull. C 
clam or clame, v. embrace, grasp; -agh, 77: 
-ee, 80; -in, 83: -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
chlame or chlaym*, v. did embrace or 
grasp in an awkward or clumsy manner; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. C 
clamey, v. embracing or grasping in a 
clumsy manner.  
clamit, 85. grasped, &c.  
s’clamit, a. how clumsily embraced. C 
clameyder, s. m. an embracer, &c.  
yn chlameyder, s. the embracer. C  
clamp, s. m. a patch; pl. -yn. 
clamp, v. patch; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -ey, 82. 
chlamp, v. did patch; -agh; -ee; -ey; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. C  
clampit 
s’clampit, a. how patched. C 
77 
C 
 
clann or clahn, v. thicken, populate; used 
chiefly for meal to thicken in boiling.  
chlann, v. did populate or thicken; -agh; 
-aghey; -ee; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. C  
clannaghey or clanney, v. thickening, 
populating.  
clahnit 
s’clahnit, a. how thickened. C 
yn chlanneyder, s. the thickener, &c, &c. 
C  
clash, s. f. a hollow in land made by the 
ending furrow, a hollow on the back of a 
horse with fatness, any hollow or groove.  
yn chlash, s. 6. the hollow; pl. -yn. C  
clashagh 
s’c<h>lashagh, a. how full of ending 
furrows. C  
clashit 
s’c<h>lashit, a. how furrowed. C 
clasht, v. hear, hearken, hark, hark thou.  
clashtyn, v. hearing. 
er chlashtyn, v. hath, &c, &c., heard. C  
ry-chlashtyn, v. to be beard. 
aa-chlashtyn, s. m. a rehearing. 
far-chlashtyn, s. m. dulness of hearing, 
hard of hearing, not able to hear well. 
cluin or cluinn*, v. hear ; -agh, 77.  
clin, v. hear. See also cluin, which I reckon 
the best Manks; -agh, 77. 
clynn, v. hear. See cluin. 
clynnee. v. See cluinee; Exod. xv. 14: 
Clynnee yn pobble, as bee aggle orroo nee 
seaghyn greimmey cummaltee Phalestina. The 
people shall hear, and be afraid: sorrow shall 
take hold on the inhabitants of Palestina.  
chluin or chluinn oo, v. didst thou hear; 
-agh; -ee; -in; -ins; -ym; -ys, 94. C  
chlin or chluin, v. did hear; -agh; -ee; -in; 
-ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. C 
cheayll, v. did hear, heard.  
clinnit, 85. heard.  
s’cluinit, a. how well heard. C 
cluineyder, s. m. a hearer; pl. -yn. 
clineyder, s. m. a hearer; pl. -yn.  
clea, s. f. any timber or iron barred across 
each other, as a gate, harrow.  
yn chlea, s. the roof, &c. See clea. C  
cleain or cleaiyn, s. pl. harrows.  
e chleayn, s. his harrows. C 
clein, s. pl. See cleaiyn or cleain.  
chlein. See chleayn. C  
fo-chlea, adv. under house roof, under 
cover; 1 Sam. xix. 11: Hug Saul myrgeddin 
chaghteryn gys thie Ghavid, dy lhie fo-chlea er 
e hon, as dy varroo eh sy voghrey. Saul also 
sent messengers unto David’s house, to watch 
him, and to slay him in the morning. 
cooyl-chlea, a. in ambush, in wait, lying in 
wait, behind the screen. 
uinnag-chlea, s. f. a sky-light or literally a 
roof-light. 
cleaiee [or] cleiee, v. harrow; -agh, 77; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86.  
chleiee, v. did harrow; -agh; -in; -ins; -it; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. C  
dy chleaee or chleiee, to harrow. C 
cleieet 
s’cleieet, a. how harrowed. C 
cleaieeder, s. m. a harrower.  
clean, s. m. cradle or creel; pl. -yn.  
yn chlean, s. the cradle or creel. C  
cleayn, s. m. enticement, allurement, 
seducement, delusion.  
yn chleayn s. m. the allurement or 
enticement. 
cleoyn, s. bent, propensity, inclination.  
cleayn or cleaynee, v. entice, allure, 
seduce.  
chleayn, v. did allure, incline, or entice; 
-agh; -ee; -ey; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94; 
C  
cleaynaghey or cleayney, v. enticing.  
dy chleaynaghey, v. to entice, to draw; 
Acts, xx. 30: Myrgeddin nyn mast’ eu hene 
nee deiney girree seose, loayrt goan kialgagh, 
dy chleaynaghey daue hene fir-eiyrtee. Also of 
your own selves shall men arise, speaking 
perverse things, to draw away disciples after 
them. C 
cleaynee, a. d. of enticing or alluring. 
cleaynit 
s’cleaynit, a. how enticed, allured, &c. C 
cleayneyder, s. m. an enticer or allurer.  
yn chleayneyder, s. the enticer, &c. C 
cleaysh, s. f. an ear, a lug, the handle of a tub 
or can, &c.; pl. -yn.  
78 
C 
 
yn chleaysh, s. the ear; pl. -yn. C  
cleayshey, a. d. of the ear, auricular.  
chleayshey, a. d. of the ear or ears. C  
cleaysh-liauyr, s. f. a long ear, slow in 
answering, forbearing.  
cleaysh-lheeah, s. f. a moss that grows on 
rocks, and is used in dying red. <S> 
ry-chleayshyn, adv. by the ears. 
cleayshagh, a. having ears or lugs. 
cled 
chled, v. did overset; -agh; -al; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. C 
cledge, s. f. bran: pl. -yn.  
yn chledge, s. the bran,  
cledgeagh, a. branny. C  
cleeau, s. f. chest, breast, stomach. 
e chleeau, s. his chest, breast, or stomach; 
beeal my chleeau (the pit of my stomach). 
C  
cleeir, a. clear. Hymn 54: Dy bailt ’chur orrym 
briwnys geyre, / veagh deyrey cair dou, t’ou uss 
cleer. [If you wished to impose strict judgment 
on me, the condemnation of me would be just, 
you are clear. MWW] 
cleigh or cleiy, s. m. a hedge. 
yn chleiy, s. the hedge. 
<e> [ny] c<h>leigh, s. pl. <his> [the] 
hedges; Luke, xiv. 23: As dooyrt y chiarn rish 
y charvaant, Gow magh gys ny raaidyn 
mooarey as ny cleigh, as guee orroo dy heet 
stiagh, dy vod my hie ve er ny lhieeney. And 
the lord said unto the servant, Go out into the 
highways and hedges, and compel them to 
come in, that my house may be filled. C  
<e> [ny] c<h>leiyee, s. pl. <his> [the] 
hedges; Jer. xlix. 3: …yllee-jee, inneenyn 
Rabbah; cur-jee erriu aanrit-sack; jean-jee 
dobberan, as roie-jee noon as noal rish ny 
cleiyee. …cry, ye daughters of Rabbah, gird 
you with sackcloth; lament, and run to and fro 
by the hedges. C  
clei[e]e, s. pl. hedges; a. d. of hedge or 
hedges.  
kiebbey cleiyee, s. m. a hedge spade. 
cleigh or cleiy, v. dig, delve, quarry; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83. 
dy chleiy, v. to dig, delve, &c.; -agh; -ee; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. C  
cleight, v. dug, quarried. 
s’cleight or s’cleiyit, a. how dug, delved, 
or quarried. C 
ro chleiyt or chleight, 85. too much dug, 
delved or quarried. C  
cleiyder, s. m. a delver, a quarrier.  
yn chleiyder, s. the digger or delver. C 
cleiy-fo, v. supplanting.  
clein, s. m. the clan, the surname.  
dy chlein, a. of surname. 
clep, s. a grapple or grapnel, a large hook set 
in a handle; pl. -yn.  
cleragh, s. m. a clerk. pl. 71 [change -agh to 
-ee].  
yn chleragh, s. the clerk; pl. 71. C  
cleragh-ny-lioaryn, s. m. the Clerk of the 
Rolls. 
cleree, a. d. of a clerk, or clerks.  
clereeys, s. f. clerkship: pl. -yn.  
e chlereeys, s. his clerkship. C  
cleragh, s. m. a piece put into the chimb of a 
wooden vessel. pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
clesp, s. f. a clasp. 
clesp, v. clasp; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -ey, 82; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84.  
clet, s. f. a rock in the sea, near a larger one; it 
is used for the same in Erse; it is also used 
for apiece of timber nailed on a larger piece 
to hinder anything from passing.  
yn chlet, s. the rock in the sea. C 
cleuin, s. m. a son-in law, a daughter’s 
husband. See also ben-chleuin. 
yn chleuin, s. the son-in-law. Eshyn ta 
geddyn dooinney mie da e inneen t’eh 
cosney mac. Agh eh ta geddyn drogh-
chleuin t’eh coayl inneen. [He who gets a 
good man for his daughter gains a son. but 
he who gets a bad son-in-law loses a 
daughter.] C  
ben-chleuin, s. f. a son’s wife, daughter-in-
law. 
cleuinys, s. f. affinity, relationship.  
e chleuinys, s. his affinity by marriage. C  
cliaght, v. accustom, practice; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -it, 85.  
79 
C 
 
chliaght, v. did accustom or practice; -agh; 
-ee; -ey, -in; -ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. C 
cliaghtit 
s’cliaghtit, a. how accustomed. C 
cliaghtey, s. m. practice, habit, custom, 
fashion; pl. 67 [change -ey to -aghyn]. 
yn chliaghtey, s. the custom, habit, or 
practice. 
cliaghteyder, s. m. a practiser, &c.  
yn chliaghteyder, s. the practiser, &c. C 
cliaghtal, a. 
s’claughtal (sic), a. with how much 
satisfaction in the use of comp. and sup. C 
cliass, s. m. a happening alike, the same fate, 
like as. [‘coincidence’] 
yn chliass, s. the fate. C 
cliejeen 
cliegeen, s. f. a jewel; Pro. xi. 2[2]: Myr 
cliegeen dy airh ayns stroin muickey, myr shen 
ta ben aalin, fegooish ymmyrkey mie. As a 
jewel of gold in a swine’s snout, so is a fair 
woman which is without discretion; a loop or 
ring; pl. -yn. The g in this word ought to be 
a j, according to Dr. Kelly’s Manks 
grammar and the latter part of remark 12, as 
I never heard the hard sound given to the g 
in this word in conversation. Etymology 
perhaps from cleaysh (an ear) and jesheen 
(an ornament).  
yn chliegeen, s. the ear-ring or jewel, &c. C  
clink, s. f. a curvature; pl. -yn. 
clink, s. f. a trick; pl. -yn. 
click, s. See clink. 
clinkeragh, v. tinkling; Isa. iii. 16: …ta’n 
Chiarn dy ghra, Er-y-fa dy vel inneenyn Zion 
mooaralagh, as shooyl dy ard-wannallagh, as 
lesh sooillyn rouanagh, shooyl as keimyragh 
myr t’ad goll, as clinkeragh lesh nyn gassyn: 
…the Lord saith, Because the daughters of 
Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched forth 
necks and wanton eyes, walking and mincing 
as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet.  
clioagagh, s. m. gladers, flagers, sword-grass, 
bulrushes; Exod. ii. 3: As tra nagh dod ee 
keiltyn eh ny sodjey, ren ee da clean dy 
hioonyn, as slaa ee eh lesh cray as pick-
hallooin, as hug ee yn lhiannoo ayn; as daag 
ee eh ’sy chlioagagh rish broogh ny hawin. 
And when she could not longer hide him, she 
took for him an ark of bulrushes, and daubed it 
with slime and with pitch, and put the child 
therein; and she laid it in the flags by the river’s 
brink. 
yn chlioagagh, s. the bulrushes; Ex. ii. 3 
[see above]; the flaggers. C 
clioagagh gliwnagh, s. f. gladwin or 
stinking gladwin.  
clist, s. m. spring, elasticity. 
yn chlist, s. the elasticity or spring. 
clist, v. -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84.  
chlist, v. -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 
94. C  
clistal, v. spring, bounding.  
clisteyder, s. m. a springer or bounder.  
cliwe, s. f. a sword; pl. -nyn. 
yn chliwe, s. the sword. C  
clo* or cloghey, v. chase, chasing; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins. 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys. 88.  
chlo, v. did chase; -agh; -ee; -in; -ins; -it; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. C  
cloghey v. chasing.  
dy chloghey, v. to chase. C  
cloee, a. d. of chasing, or the chase.  
cloder, s. m. a chaser; pl. -yn.  
yn chloder, the chaser. C  
cloag, v. cloak, or cover with a cloak; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84.  
chloag, v. did cloak; -agh; -ee; -in; -ym; 
-ys. C  
cloagey, s. m. a cloak or mantle; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn].  
yn chloaghey, s. the cloak. C  
cloan, s. pl. children, descendants.  
e chloan, s. his clan or children. C  
cloan-gheiney, s. pl. children of men.  
cloan-ny-mollaght, s. pl. cursed children.  
clienney, a. d. of <the> children; Mark, vii. 
27: Agh dooyrt Yeesey r’ee, Lhig da’n chloan 
ve hoshiaght jeant magh: son cha vel eh cooie 
arran ny clienney y ghoaill as y hilgey eh gys 
moddee. But Jesus said unto her, Let the 
children first be filled: for it is not meet to take 
the children’s bread, and to cast it unto the 
80 
C 
 
dogs.  
chlienney, a. d. of children. C  
cloie, s. m. a play. 
thie cloie, s. m. a play-house. 
far-chloie, s. m. foul play. See also drogh-
chloie. 
claghyn-cloie, s. the bird stonechatter. 
cloie, v. play, boil; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84.  
chloie, v. did play or boil; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. C  
dy chloie, v. 6. to play, sport, tamper, &c. C  
dy chloiaghyn, [v]. to play. C  
cloiet, 85. played, boiled. 
cloieder, s. m. a player; pl. -yn.  
clon-chour, s. m. the after-birth.  
yn chlon-chour, s. the after-birth. C  
clooid, s. m. a clout; pl. -yn. 
yn chlooid, s. the clout. C  
clooid-juist, s. m. a dish clout.  
clooid-rubbee, s. m. a. towel.  
clooid, v. to clout.  
clooideraght, v. patching, clouting. 
clooidit, 85. clouted, patched. 
clooie, s. f. small feathers, fur.  
yn chlooie the small feathers. C  
bran[-]clooie, s. f. the down of feathers. 
clooiesag, s. f. a bolster of feathers; pl. -yn. 
clus* or clooeys, v. cover with feathers; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms; 87; -ys, 88.  
clusaghey, v. expanding the wings over the 
young of fowls, covering with feathers.  
clusit, 85. the young of a fowl covered by 
the dam.  
clou or clouw, s. m. a pair of tongs; pl. 
cloughyn; 1 Kings, vii. 49: As ny kainlereyn 
dy airh ghlen, queig er y cheu yesh, as queig er 
y cheu chiare kiongoyrt rish yn ynnyd 
casherick, marish ny blaaghyn, as ny lampyn, 
as ny cloughyn airh. And the candlesticks of 
pure gold, five on the right side, and five on the 
left, before the oracle, with the flowers, and the 
lamps, and the tongs of gold.  
clowan, s. f. a frame to wind a line on. 
yn chlowan, s. the reel of a line. C  
clowan, v. craving, teasing, claiming, 
dunning.  
clowanagh, s. m. a craver or dunner; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
clowanit, 85, teased by dunning, &c.  
cluge, s. f. craft, intrigue.  
e chluig, s. his guile, cunning, craft. C  
cluigagh or clugagh, a. crafty, cunning, 
wily, treacherous.  
s’clugagh, a. how cunning or crafty. C 
s’clugee, a. id., comp. and sup. C 
feer chluigagh, a. very cunning, &c. C  
clugeid, s. f. craftiness, cunningness. 
co-  
co-ard, s. as high, of the same height.  
co-ayrnagh, s. m. a partaker; Rom. xv. 27: 
Son my ta ny Ashoonee er ny ve jeant co-
ayrnee jeh ny nheeghyn spyrrydoil ocsyn, yn 
currym oc eh myrgeddin dy hirveish orroosyn 
ayns nheeghyn seihltagh. For if the Gentiles 
have been made partakers of their spiritual 
things, their duty is also to minister unto them in 
carnal things.  
co-casley, a. equal in likeness, alike.  
 co-caslys, s. m. likeness, form, portrait.  
 yn cho[-]chaslys, s. the likeness. C  
co-chorrym, a. equal, equipoise.  
 feer chochorrym, a. very equal. C  
 e chochorrymid, s. his equality. C  
co-choud, adv. equidistant, equally far.  
co-chruin or cochruinee, v. congregate, 
assemble in a multitude, besiege; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
 co[-]chruinaghey, v. assembling, &c.  
 co[-]chruinit. 85. congregated, 
besieged, &c.  
 co[-]chruinaght, s. m. an assembly a 
concourse or congregation of people, a 
besiegement.  
 yn cho[-]chruinaght, s. the 
congregation. C  
co-dowin, a. as deep, equal in partnership.  
co[-]lhean, adv. as wide, equally broad. 
Colhean coliauyr (as broad as long). 
co[-]lhiabbagh, s. m. f. a bed-fellow; a 
concubine; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
 e cho[-]lhiabbagh, s. his bed-fellow, 
81 
C 
 
his concubine, or harlot; 1 Chron. vii. 14: 
Mec Vanasseh, Ashriel: (agh ren e cho-
lhiabbagh yn Aramitess gymmyrkey Machir ayr 
Ghilead. The sons of Manasseh; Ashriel, whom 
she bare: (but his concubine the Aramitess 
bare Machir the father of Gilead. C  
co[-]liack, adv. alike, equal. See also 
coliak.  
 co[-]liak, adv. alike. of the same 
likeness.  
co[-]liauyr, adv. as long, equal in length.  
co[-]loayrt, v. conversing; -agh, 77, &c.  
 co[-]loayrtagh, s. m. converser; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
 co[-]loayrtys, s. m. conversation; pl. 
-yn.  
co-vollaght 
yn cho-vollaght, s. the conspiracy; Acts, 
xxiii. 13: As va erskyn da-eed jeu fo yn cho-
vollaght shoh. And they were more than forty 
which had made this conspiracy. C 
coad, v. protect, defend; -agh, 77; -aghey, 82; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
choad, v. did protect; -agh; -aghey; -in; 
-ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. C  
coadey, s. m. protection; pl. 67 [change -ey 
to -aghyn].  
e choadey, s. his protection. C  
coadee, a. d. of protection or defence.  
choadee, a. d. of protection. C  
fer-c<h>oadee, s. m. a protector; pl. fir-
choadee. 
coadeyder or fer c<h>oadee, s. m. a 
protector.  
coadan, s. m. a protected person, a ward.  
coagyr, v. cook, dress meat; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
choagyr, v. did cook; -agh; -in; -ins; -it; 
-ym; -yms; -ys. 94. C  
coagyrit, 85. cooked meat, dressed.  
s’coagyrit, a. how cooked or dressed. C 
coagyrey, s. m. a cook; pl. 67 [change -ey 
to -aghyn].  
coair, adv. near, nigh.  
ny choair, adv. nigh to, near. C  
coamr or coamree, v. clothe, dress; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
choamr* or choamree, v. did clothe; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. C  
coamrit, 85. clothed, dressed, covered; it 
means finished in Neh. vi. 15: Myr shoh va’n 
voalley dy slane coamrit er y wheiggoo laa as 
feed jeh mee Elul, ayns daa laa jeig as da-eed. 
So the wall was finished in the twenty and fifth 
day of the month Elul, in fifty and two days; and 
endued in Luke, xxiv. 49: …agh fuirree-jee 
ayns ard-valley Yerusalem, derrey vees shiu 
coamrit lesh pooar veih’n yrjid. …but tarry ye 
in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with 
power from on high.  
s’coamrit, a. how clad or clothed. C 
coamrey, s. m. clothing, garment, attire, 
dress, apparel; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
e choamrey, s. his clothing or dress. C  
coamree, a. d. of clothing or dress.  
coamrey-vraghey, s. The meaning of 
coamrey in this word is not now in use; it 
was an old custom of going to drink ale or 
beer in the person’s house where the malt-
seller sold his malt.  
coamrey-yn-thie, v. keeping the house in 
repair.  
coamreyder, s. m. a dresser, a clother.  
yn choamreyder, s. the clother. C  
coan or couan, s. m. a valley or glen.  
yn choan, s. the vale or valley. C 
coar, a. agreeable, sociable, civil, indulgent.  
s’coar, a. how agreeable, social, or civil. C 
feer choar, a. very agreeable or civil. C  
coar, s. f. a twister; pl. -yn.  
yn choar, s. the twister. C  
coard, v. agree; -agh, 77; -ail, 78; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
choard, v. did agree; -agh; -in; -ins; -it; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. C 
coardit, 85. agreed, settled. 
cordail, a. according, pursuant.  
coardail, s. m. an agreement; pl. -yn.  
yn choardail, s. the agreement. C  
meechordail, s. m. disagreement. 
coardailys, s. m. agreement, agreeableness.  
meechordailys, s. m. disagreement. 
coardeyder, s. m. an agreer; pl. -yn.  
82 
C 
 
coasan, s. m. an equal in age.  
dty choasan, s. thy equal in age; Gal. i. 14: 
As ayns credjue ny Hewnyn va mee ynsit 
erskyn ymmodee my choasanyn ayns my 
ashoon hene, shassoo jeean son cliaghtaghyn 
m’ayraghyn. And profited in the Jews’ religion 
above many my equals in mine own nation, 
being more exceedingly zealous of the 
traditions of my fathers. C  
coau, s. f. chaff; pl. -yn.  
yn choau, s. the chaff. C  
my-choau, adv. in chaff. 
coauagh, a. chaffy.  
feer choauagh, a. very chaffy. C 
coayl, s. m. loss, damage.  
yn choayl, s. the loss; Prov. “Cha jarg oo 
dty choayl y chreck.” [You cannot sell your 
loss.] C 
cailjey, a. d. of loss or losing, of straying or 
strayed.  
chailjey, a. d. of loss or losing, of straying 
or strayed; as, kirree chailjey; Mat. xviii. 
12: My ta keead keyrrey ec dooinney, as 
unnane jeu v’er n’gholl er-shaghryn, nagh vel 
eh faagail yn chiare-feed as yn nuy-jeig, as goll 
gys ny sleityn, as shirrey yn cheyrrey chailjey? 
if a man have an hundred sheep, and one of 
them be gone astray, doth he not leave the 
ninety and nine, and goeth into the mountains, 
and seeketh that which is gone astray? C  
coayl, v. 
caill, v. lose; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys. 88.  
chaill, v. did lose; -agh; -in; -ins; -it; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. C  
caillit or caillt, 85. lost, perished.  
s’caillit or s’cailt, a. how lost. C 
cailleyder, s. m. a loser; pl. -yn. 
coayr or coair, a. odd; Num. iii. 48: As nee oo 
cur yn argid, lesh t’ou feaysley yn earroo 
coayr, da Aaron, as da e vec. And thou shalt 
give the money, wherewith the odd number of 
them is to be redeemed, unto Aaron and to his 
sons.  
s’coir or s’coyr, a. how odd, comp. and 
sup. C 
nane choir, a. an odd one. C 
corrillagh, s. m. the odds, balance, the 
fractional part; pl. -yn.  
 coirrillagh, a. [?] some odds.  
 yn choirrillagh, s. the odds. C 
corlheim, v. hop, leap on one foot; -agh, 
77; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88.  
dy chorlheim, v. to hop, or leap on one 
foot. C  
corlheimeraght, v. hopping, capering, 
skipping.  
e chorlheimyragh, v. his capering, 
hopping, &c. C  
coayr 
yn choayr, s. the bittern; Isa. xxxiv. 11: 
Agh nee yn cormorant, as y choayr cummal 
ayn, yn hullad myrgeddin; as y feeagh goaill 
ayn. But the cormorant and the bittern shall 
possess it; the owl also and the raven shall 
dwell in it. C 
coar-chrattagh, s. f. a snipe; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee]. 
coar-ny-hastan, s. f. a crane; pl. -yn.  
cobbyr, s. f. copper; pl. -yn.  
coe, v. grieving. mourning, weeping; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88. Prov. “Mannagh vow cliaghtey 
cliaghtey nee cliaghtey coe.” [If custom be 
not indulged with custom, custom will 
weep.] 
e choe, v. his grieving or weeping. C 
coeyder, s. m. a weeper, a griever; pl. -yn.  
coggyl, s. f. cockle, tares; Job, xxxi. 40: Lhig 
da onnaneyn gaase seose ayns ynnyd 
curnaght, as coggyl ayns ynnyd oarn. Let 
thistles grow instead of wheat, and cockle 
instead of barley.  
yn choggyl, s. the tare or cockle. C 
coghal, s. m. the core of a sore; pl. -yn.  
yn choghal, s. the core of a sore. C  
choghalagh, a. having cores; a. d. of a core 
or cores. C 
coidyr, s. f. straw drawn for ropes.  
coigee, s. f. a loom; pl. -yn.  
yn choigee, s. the loom. C  
coillar, s. m. the halter of a horse; pl. -yn.  
yn choillar, s. the beast’s halter. C 
83 
C 
 
coirrey, s. m. a crucible, a caldron, furnace, 
or kettle; pl. 67 [change -ey to -aghyn].  
yn choirrey, s. the crucible, or furnace. C 
colb or colbey, s. m. the body, trunk, or hull. 
This word, no doubt, is the old Manks for 
body.  
yn cholbey, s. the body, trunk, or hull. C  
cosh-ry-cholbey, a. going in a body 
together, walking cheek-by-jowl. 
colbagh, s. f. a heifer; pl. 72 [change -agh to 
-eeyn]. The plural of this word ought to be 
colbee and not colbeeyn, but custom 
frequently overcomes rule.  
yn cholbagh, s. the heifer. C 
colbee, a. d. of a heifer or heifers.  
coleayrtys, s. twilight, partaking of light and 
darkness.  
yn choleayrtys, s. the twilight. C  
comleayrtys or çhionnleayrtys, s. m. the 
time between day-break and sunrise, and 
sunset and night. The word is in its 
aspirated state in Josh. ii. 5: As haink eh gy-
kione mysh traa dooney ny giattey, ’sy 
chomleayrtys, dy jagh ny deiney magh. And it 
came to pass about the time of shutting of the 
gate, when it was dark, that the men went out; 
pl. -yn.  
yn chomleayrtys or choleayrtys, s. the 
time when one is hardly able to see clear by 
reason of being dark or duskish. The former 
of these words is in Josh. ii. 5 [see above], 
and the latter in 2 Sam. xvii. 22: Eisht hrog 
David er, as ooilley’n pobble va mârish, as 
chossyn ad harrish Jordan: cha row fer jeu 
nagh row er gheddyn harrish Jordan ec y cho-
leayrtys. Then David arose, and all the people 
that were with him, and they passed over 
Jordan: by the morning light there lacked not 
one of them that was not gone over Jordan. C 
comleayrtagh or çhionnleayrtagh, a. hard 
to see, difficult to discern because of 
darkness coming on.  
feer chomleayrtagh or çhionnleayrtagh, 
a. 6. very difficult to see or descry on 
account of darkness. C  
coll or cohll, s. m. hazel, a tree.  
yn choll, s. the hazel. C  
car-coll, s. m. a hitch of a rope; a knot on a 
timber-head, of that tree, —whence the 
name Coll. 
collagh, s. m. a stallion. The males of many 
animals are called collagh; as, collagh assyl 
(a he-ass); collagh muck (a boar); collagh 
kayt (a he or kaarl cat), &c. pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee].  
yn chollagh, s. the stallion. C  
collee, a. d. of a stallion or stallions.  
colleeys, s. m. the action of a stallion or 
male animal with his mate.  
collan-bing, s. m. a sound in the ear as of a 
bell.  
collane, s. f. a gut or entrail.  
e chollane, s. his gut; pl. -yn. C  
greim-collane, s. f. a gripe.  
lus y chollane, s. f. the herb robin run over 
the hedge. 
collaneagh, a. intestinal.  
collan-jargan or cadley-jargan, s. m. a 
sensation of pain generally felt in the foot 
or feet attended with slight pricking pains 
all over the member, which is quite torpid 
at the time. [Pins and needles.] Perhaps it 
ought to be written ghallar-jerkan.  
coll-mea, s. f. the herb lamb-quarter. Perhaps 
it ought to be kail-mea (a fat or luxuriant 
cole or cabbage).  
yn choll-mea, s. the herb lamb-quarter. C 
Colloo, s. f. the Calf Island. This word, like 
many others, is difficult to know from what 
it has been derived, as it differs from the 
Manks of calf, (the young of a cow); but 
perhaps it ought to be spelled cauf. 
Conjectures in such cases are endless—
some persons will have it to be from cooyl-
halloo (behind the land); others that it is 
from coayl (loss); and others that it is so 
called on account of its being formerly 
frequented by puffins and this word colloo, 
being their principal note.  
yn Cholloo, s. the Calf Island. C  
Chylloo, a. d. of the Calf Island. C  
Keylliu, a. d. of the Calf Island.  
coltar, s. m. a coulter or cutter of a plough; pl. 
-yn.  
yn choltar, s. the coulter. C  
84 
C 
 
coltrag, s. a coulter bill fowl.  
yn choltrag, s. the coulter bill bird. C  
combaas or combaase, v. compass, surround, 
encircle; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
chombaas* or chombaase, v. did 
encompass; -agh; -al; -in; -ins; -it; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. C  
combaasal, v. encompassing, encircling.  
combaasey, v. See combaasal.  
combaasit, 85. compassed, encompassed.  
s’combaasit, a. how encompassed or 
surrounded. C  
combaase, s. m. a compass, a circular 
route.  
combaaseyder, s. m. a compasser; pl. -yn.  
commee, a. common participation; Rev. ii. 
20: …ta reddyn ennagh aym dy choyrt dty lieh, 
er-y-fa dy vel uss lhiggey da’n ven shen 
Jezebel, ta goaill urree dy ve ny adeyr, dy 
ynsaghey as dy chleayney my harvaantyn dy 
chur rish maarderys, as dy ghoaill commee 
ayns ny reddyn t’er ny ouralley gys jallooyn. I 
have a few things against thee, because thou 
sufferest that woman Jezebel, which calleth 
herself a prophetess, to teach and to seduce 
my servants to commit fornication, and to eat 
things sacrificed unto idols. Prov. “Commee 
obbyr commee bee.” [Partner in work, 
partner in food.] 
commeeys, s. partnership, fellowship, 
communion, league. This word and 
boodeeys are nearly synonymous, the 
former is used in matters respecting the 
body and the mind, Eph. iii. 9: As dy 
hoilshaghey dy foshlit da dy chooilley 
ghooinney, cre ta commeeys y folliaght ta er 
ve er dy hoshiaght y theihll keillit ayns Jee, ren 
dy chooilley nhee y chroo liorish Yeesey 
Creest. And to make all men see what is the 
fellowship of the mystery, which from the 
beginning of the world hath been hid in God, 
who created all things by Jesus Christ; and the 
latter in matters of commerce, gain, or 
partnership.  
e chommeeys, s. his fellowship. C  
comys, s. m. offence, blame; 2 Cor. viii. 20: 
Shaghney shoh, nagh der dooinney erbee 
cômys hooin ayns y phalchey shoh t’er ny 
hirveish liorin. Avoiding this, that no man should 
blame us in this abundance which is 
administered by us.  
e chomys, s. his blame, or guilt. C  
comys, s. m. the private part; pl. -yn.  
e chomys, s. his private part. C  
comyssey, v. cohabiting, copulating.  
e chomyssey, p. p. his cohabiting. C  
con[-]rieugh, a. imaginary, not real.  
con[-]traie, s. f. the neap tide. The con in this 
word is supposed to come from coon 
(narrow), as the shore is narrow at this 
time.  
yn chontraie, s. the neap tide. C 
conaant, s. m. a covenant, a condition; pl. 
-yn. 
yn chonaant, s. the covenant. C  
conaant, v. -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
conaantey, v. covenanting, bargaining.  
conaantit, 85. covenanted, conditioned.  
conaantagh, s. m. a covenanter; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. 
condaig, s. f. a contrary, crabbed person; pl. 
-ee.  
condaigagh, a. contrary, in opposition.  
s’condaigagh, a. how contrary. C 
s’condaigee, a. id., comp. and sup. C 
ro chondaigagh, a. too contrary. C  
condaigys, s. f. contrariety, contrariness; pl. 
-yn.  
e chondaigys, s. his contrariety, or crabbed 
disposition. C 
condeil, s. f. a goar in timber work; pl. -yn.  
yn chondeil, s. the gusset of timber. C 
coneeaght, s. m. the twilight, the cowering of 
night.  
yn choneeaght, s. the twilight, the 
cowering. C  
con-ghorraghey, a. something dark. Perhaps 
this word is from çhionn and dorraghey 
(hardly dark).  
con-ghorraghys or con-ghorrid, s. m. 
darkness, not altogether dark, pretty dark.  
85 
C 
 
connaase (sic: stress), s. f. disdain, contempt.  
connaasagh (sic: stress) or connysson, v. 
taunting, scoffing, disdainfully sneering, or 
teasing.  
connysagh. See connaasagh. 
feer chonnaasagh, a. very disdainful; s. m. 
a disdainful, teasing, gibing person; pl. 72 
[change -agh to -eeyn].  
[yn] chonnaasey or chonnysson, v. 
sneering, gibing, teasing in a disdainful 
manner. C  
connagh 
connagh-ny-g<h>iark, s. f. the herb 
henbane.  
conning, s. f. a coney, a rabbit.  
yn chonning, s. the coney or rabbit. C 
conneeyn, s. pl. conies, rabbits.  
conrea, s. m. a tup that has his testicles in his 
back.  
contangrys, a. cross-grained, crabbed, 
peevish.  
convayrt, s. m. a carcase, a carrion; the pl. is 
conveyrt.  
yn chonvayrt, s. the carrion or carcase. C  
coo, s. m. a greyhound; pl. coyin.  
yn choo, s. the greyhound. C  
e choyin, s. pl. his greyhounds. C  
cooag, s. f. a cuckoo; pl. -yn.  
yn chooag, s. the cuckoo. C  
bee-cooag, s. f. woodsorrel. 
smug-cooag, s. f. cuckoo spittle. 
cooagey, v. cooing as a dove; Nah. ii. 7: As 
bee Huzzab er ny leeideil ayns cappeeys, ver 
ad lhieu seose ee, as nee ny moidynyn eck 
shooyl rhymbee cooagey myr calmaneyn, as 
caayney ayns nyn gleeau. And Huzzab shall be 
led away captive, she shall be brought up, and 
her maids shall lead her as with the voice of 
doves, tabering upon their breasts.  
yn chooagey, v. the cooing; <Nah. ii. 7>. 
This word is, radically, cauaigey, in Zep. ii. 
14. C  
cauaigey, v. cooing; Zep. ii. 14: As nee ny 
shioltaneyn lhie sheese ’sy vean eck, dy 
chooilley cheint dy veisht: nee chammah yn 
choayr as y bittern goaill aaght ayns ny 
linteyryn mullee eck: nee yn coraa oc cauaigey 
ayns ny uinniagyn. And flocks shall lie down in 
the midst of her, all the beasts of the nations: 
both the cormorant and the bittern shall lodge 
in the upper lintels of it; their voice shall sing in 
the windows.  
cooat, s. m. a coat; pl. -yn. 
yn chooat, s. the coat. C 
giare-chooat, s. m. a jacket. 
mwannal cooat, s. m. the cape of a coat, 
&c. 
cooat, v. coat; -agh, 77; -al, 79; -ee 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88.  
cooatey, v. coating, covering with a coat.  
cooateyder, s. m. a coater, a coverer; pl. 
-yn.  
coob or cooib, s. m. inside of a bend; the 
piece of timber that fills the eye of the 
nether millstone.  
yn choob, s. the inside of a bend. C  
cood or coodee, v. cover -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
anchoodee, v. uncover, disclose. 
chood* or choodee, v. did cover; -agh; 
-aghey; -ee; -in; -ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 
94. C 
coodaghey, v. covering.  
anchoodaghey, v. to uncover, to develop. 
coodit 
s’coodit, a. how covered, &c. C 
coodagh, s. m. a covering; pl. -yn.  
yn choodagh, s. the cover or covering. C  
coodee, a. d. of covering or coverings.  
choodee, a. d. of a cover or covering. C 
coodeyder, s. m. a coverer; pl. -yn.  
yn choodeyder, s. the coverer. C  
cooid, s. f. goods, ware, merchandize; pl. -yn.  
yn chooid, s. the goods. C  
cooid-ronney, s. m. portion of goods 
divided.  
e chooid-ronney, s. his dividend. C  
yn chooid-sloo, s. the least. C  
yn chooid-smoo, s. the greatest. C  
cooid-vooar, s. m. something great.  
e chooid-vooar, s. his great something. C  
yn un chooid, s. the same, one and the 
same; Gen. xli. 26: Ta ny shiaght booaghyn 
86 
C 
 
mie, cowraghey shiaght bleeantyn; as ta ny 
shiaght jeeassyn mie shiaght bleeantyn: ta’n 
dreamal yn un chooid. The seven good kine 
are seven years; and the seven good ears are 
seven years: the dream is one. 
cooidjagh, adv. together.  
ooilley cooidjagh, adv. altogether, quite. 
coyrt-cooidjagh, v. joining. 
cooidjaghey, v. gathering together; Cant. 
vi. 13: O Shulamite chyndaa, chyndaa, dy vod 
mayd blâkey ort: cre hee-ys shiu ’sy 
Shulamite? myr cooidjaghey daa heshaght-
chaggee. O Shulamite; return, return, that we 
may look upon thee. What will ye see in the 
Shulamite? As it were the company of two 
armies.  
dy chooidsaghey, s. to gather together. C  
cooidsave 
s’gooidsave, a. more or most vouchsafe. 
[?] G 
s’cooidsave, v. may vouchsafe. See sgooid. 
my chooidsave, v. if vouchsafe. C  
cooie, a. fit, convenient, meet; Ez. xv. 4: Cur-
my-ner te tilgit ’syn aile dy lostey; ta’n aile dy 
stroie eh bun as baare, as ta’n mean echey 
losht. Vel eh cooie son obbyr erbee? Behold, it 
is cast into the fire for fuel; the fire devoureth 
both the ends of it, and the midst of it is burned. 
Is it meet for any work?  
s’cooie, a. how fit or proper. C 
s’cooieey, a. id., comp. and sup. C 
feer chooie, a. very fit, convenient, or meet. 
C  
dy cooie, adv. duly, fitly, properly.  
anchooie, a. unfit, unqualified. 
neu-chooie, 4. unfit, incapable, inordinate, 
indecent; Col. iii. 5: Smaghtee-jee er-y-fa 
shen ny oltyn thallooinagh eu, maarderys, neu-
ghlennid, yeearree neu-chooie, drogh vian, as 
saynt seihltagh, ta dy chur ammys da jallooyn. 
Mortify therefore your members which are upon 
the earth; fornication, uncleanness, inordinate 
affection, evil concupiscence, and 
covetousness, which is idolatry. 
cooill, s. f. a hiding place; Isa. xxviii. 17: …as 
nee’n sniaghtey-garroo sheebey ersooyl 
kemmyrk ny breagyn, as nee ny ushtaghyn 
lhieeney harrish ny cooillyn folliaght. …and the 
hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and 
the waters shall overflow the hiding place. 
There are several estates of land in the 
Island called Cooill, as Cooill-vane, Cooill-
injil, &c.; I suppose from their situation 
being behind.  
cooilley, a. d. of the situation of lying 
behind.  
cooill-lhiaght, s. f. a couch; Amos, iii. 12: 
Myr ta’n bochilley goaill ass beeal yn lion daa 
chass, ny peesh dy chleaysh; myr shen vees 
cloan Israel, ta cummal ayns Samaria as 
Damascus, er ny livrey myr veih corneil 
lhiabbagh, ny cooill lhiaght. As the shepherd 
taketh out of the mouth of the lion two legs, or a 
piece of an ear; so shall the children of Israel 
be taken out that dwell in Samaria in the corner 
of a bed, and in Damascus in a couch.  
cooilleen, s. recompense, compensation; pl. 
-aghyn [see below, cooilleeney, s. m.]; 
Rom. xii. 19: Chaarjyn ghraihagh, ny gow-jee 
cooilleen ec nyn laue hene, agh ny sleaie lhig-
jee lesh corree: son te scruit, Lhiam’s 
kerraghey; mish nee cooilleeney, ta’n Chiarn 
dy ghra. Dearly beloved, avenge not 
yourselves, but rather give place unto wrath: for 
it is written, Vengeance is mine; I will repay, 
saith the Lord.; Heb. xi. 26: Jeeaghyn er 
oltooan Chreest berchys smoo na tashtaghyn 
Egypt, son va sooill echey gys cooilleen yn 
leagh. Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater 
riches than the treasures in Egypt: for he had 
respect unto the recompence of the reward.  
cooilleen, v. fulfil, perform, reward, 
avenge; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88;  
chooilleen, v. did fulfil or fulfilled, 
perform, reward, compensate, complete, 
finish; -agh; -ee; -ey; -in; -ins; -it; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. C 
cooilleeney, v. fulfilling, performing, 
recompensing, compensating, avenging;  
cooilleenit, 85. fulfilled, finished, &c.  
s’cooilleenit, a. how fulfilled, 
compensated, rewarded, recompensed, or 
finished. C 
cooilleeney, s. m. fulfilment, revenge; pl. 
67 [change -ey to -aghyn].  
87 
C 
 
e chooille[e]ney, s. his fulfilment, his 
revenge. C 
e chooilleenaghyn, s. pl. his fulfilment, his 
revenges. C 
cooilleeneyder, s. m. an avenger, fulfiller, 
&c.; pl. -yn.  
yn chooilleeneyder, s. the fulfiller, 
avenger, &c. C  
cooin 
s’cooin-lhesh, p. he remembers. C 
s’cooin-lhee, p. she remembers. C 
s’cooin-lhieu, p. they remember, and you 
or ye remember. C 
s’cooin-lhiam, p. I remember. C 
s’cooin-lhiat, p. thou rememberest. C 
s’cooin-lhien, p. we remember. C 
cooin or cooinee, v. remember, recollect; 
-agh, 77; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
chooin* or chooinee, v. did remember, or 
recollect; -agh; -in; -ins; -it; -ym; -yms; 
-ys, 94. C  
cooinaghtyn, v. 
dy chooinaghtyn, v. to have remembrance 
or memory.  
cooinit 
s’cooinit, a. how remembered. C 
cooinaght or cooinaghtyn, s. m. memory 
recollection, remembrance.  
aa-chooinaghtyn, s. m. recollection. 
dy chooinaght, v. to remember, &c. C  
cooinney, s. 
camman-er-cooinney, a pique or grudge in 
memory. 
cooinaghyn, s. m. memorandum.  
e chooinaghyn, s. his memory, &c.  
cooinidagh, a. retentive, recollective.  
s’cooinaghtagh or s’cooinidagh, a. how 
recollective or retentive. C 
s’cooinidee, a. id., comp. and sup. C 
feer chooinidagh, a. very recollective. C 
cooineyder, s. m. a rememberer. 
cooiney, s. m. coin; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
cooineyder, s. m. a coiner.  
cooinsheanse, s. f. conscience; pl. -yn.  
e chooinsheanse, s. 6. his conscience. C  
cooinsheansagh, a. conscientious.  
s’c<h>ooinsheansagh, a. how 
conscionable or conscious. C 
s’c<h>ooinsheansee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
C 
cooish, s. f. a cause, case, affair; pl. -yn.  
yn chooish, s. the cause ; pl. -yn. C  
far-chooish, s. f. a fictitious cause, a cause 
adduced for instance. 
trome-chooisagh, a. important, of great 
weight or consequence. 
cooishagh, a. cautelous, desirous of 
information or knowledge, wily, sly.  
feer chooisagh, a. very curious, or 
inquisitive. C 
dy cooishagh, adv. wily, cunningly, slily; 
Josh. ix. 4: Hie ad gys obbyr dy cooishagh, 
as lhig ad orroo hene dy ve chaghteryn reeoil, 
as ghow ad shenn saick er nyn assylyn, as 
siyn-feeyney, shenn, raipit, as kerrit. They did 
work wilily, and went and made as if they had 
been ambassadors, and took old sacks upon 
their asses, and wine bottles, old, and rent, and 
bound up.  
coolley or cooylley, s. f. the valve, or leaf of a 
door.  
yn choolley, s. the leaf, or valve of a door, 
cupboard, &c. C  
coollee or co[o]yllee, a. d. of a valve or 
valves of a leaf of a door, &c. 
coon, a. narrow, not wide. 
cooney, a. pl. narrow, strait.  
buird chooney, s. pl. narrow tables, boards. 
C 
s’coon, a. how narrow. C  
s’cooiney, a. the comp. and sup. of coon. C 
ro choon a. too narrow. C  
coon, v. narrow; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
coonagh 
dy choonagh, v. to make narrow. C  
er choonaghey, v. hath, &c. narrowed, &c. 
C  
coonid, s. m. narrowness.  
lesh y choonid, adv. rather narrow. 
coon, v. help, aid, assist; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cooin, v. i. help, aid, assist.  
88 
C 
 
choon, v. [did] help, aid, assist; -agh; -ee; 
-in; -ins; -ym -yms; -ys, 94. C  
chooin, v. helped, did help, aid, or assist. C  
cooney, s. m. help, aid, assistance; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn].  
yn chooney, s. the help, aid, assistance. C  
coonee, a. d. of help or assistance.  
fir choonee, s. pl. helpers, aiders, &c. C  
cooneyder, s. m. or fer-c<h>oonee, a 
helper, an aider.  
dty er-coonee, s. thy helper. F 
fir-choonee, s. pl. helpers. 
yn chooneyder, s. the helper. See fer 
c<h>oonee. C  
coonlagh, s. f. straw; pl. 72 [change -agh to 
-eeyn].  
yn choonlagh, s. the straw, haum, &c. C  
yn yiare-choonlagh, s. the stubble; Isa. 
lxvii. 14: Cur-my-ner, bee ad myr y yiare-
choonlagh; nee yn aile ad y lostey; cha jean 
ad livrey ad-hene veih pooar y lossey. Behold, 
they shall be as stubble; the fire shall burn 
them; they shall not deliver themselves from 
the power of the flame. G 
coonlee, a. d. of straw, of the straw.  
choonlee, a. d. of straw, or haum. C  
faiyr-choonlee, s. f. stubble grass. 
coonr[*] or coonre, v. exchange, barter, 
truck, commute, swop; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-ey, 82; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
choonr* or choonree, v. did exchange, 
barter, truck, swop, or commute; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -it; -ym; -yms, 94. C  
dy choonrey, v. to exchange, barter, &c. C 
coonrit 
s’coonrit, a. how exchanged or swopped. C 
coonrey, s. m. an exchange; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn].  
coonree, a. d. of exchange, or barter, &c.  
coonreyder, s. m. an exchanger; pl. -yn.  
yn choonreyder, a. the exchanger, &c. C  
coont, v. count, reckon, calculate; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -ey, 82; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -it, 85; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
choont, v. did reckon, count, or sum up; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94.  
dy choontey, v. to reckon, account, cypher, 
to cast accounts. C 
coontit 
s’coontit, a. how counted, reckoned or 
calculated. C 
coontey, s. m. an account, sake, sake of, 
reckoning, history; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. Prov. “Coontey ny heïn roish ta 
ny hoohyn guirt.” [Counting the chickens 
before the eggs are hatched.] 
er-coontey, adv. on account. 
coontee 
fir choontee, s. pl. male accountants. C  
coonteyder 
yn choonteyder, s. the accountant. C 
coorse, s. m. course; pl. -yn.  
yn choorse, s. the course. C  
cooyl, adv. behind, aback.  
Fer cooyl-duirn (one to aid or help in case 
of need).  
e chooyl, s. his back part, or hinder part.  
ny chooyl, pre. behind, aback. C 
er-gooil or er-gooyl, adv. in arrear, behind 
hand, behind. 
er-y-chooyl, adv. shortly, by and bye, 
presently. 
cooyl-cassid, v. backbiting; Rom. i. 30 [see 
below]. 
cooyl-cassidagh, s. m. a backbiter; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. [Rom. i. 30: 
Cooylchasseydee, noidyn Yee, roonee, 
moyrnee, boggyssee, gientyn reddyn olk, mee-
viallee da ayraghyn as moiraghyn. Backbiters, 
haters of God, despiteful, proud, boasters, 
inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents.] 
cooyl-chlea, a. in ambush, in wait, lying in 
wait, behind the screen.  
cooyl-skirraghtagh, s. m. a backslider; pl. 
71 [change -agh to -ee].  
cooyrt, s. a court or yard; pl. -yn.  
yn chooyrt, s. the court or yard. C  
cooyrtey, a. d. of a court or yard.  
coraa, s. f. voice, pl. -ghyn.  
yn choraa, s. the voice. C  
ard-choraa, s. m. loud voice; pl. -yn. 
doccar-coraa, s. m. emphasis; a. doccar-
coraaagh, emphatic. 
coraa-dorraghey, s. m. a parable or dark 
saying; pl. coraaghyn-dorraghey.  
89 
C 
 
coraagh 
feer choraagh, a. very vocal. C 
corb, s. m. an heirloom; pl. -yn.  
yn chorb, s. the heirloom. C 
corkey, s. m. oats, oat grain; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn].  
yn chorkey, s. the oats. C 
corkey-taghyrt, s. m. long bearded oats.  
sheel cor[k]ey, s. m. seed oats. 
corlaig, s. f. a coalrake or muckrake.  
yn chorlaig s. the coalrake, or muckrake. C  
corlan. s. f. an earth nut or pig nut; pl. -yn.  
curlan, s. f. a pig nut or earth nut; pl. -yn.  
corneil, s. f. a corner; pl. -yn.  
yn chorneil, s. the corner. C  
corneilagh, a. having corners; a. d. of a 
corner or corners.  
chorneilagh, a. d. of the corner or corners. 
C  
s’corneilagh, a. how cornered. C 
corockle, s. m. a consonant; pl. 69.  
corp, s. m. a body, a corpse; pl. kirp; the 
body of any thing.  
kirp, s. pl. bodies; the pl. of corp.  
yn chorp, s. the body. C  
kirpey 
chirpey, a. d. of the body or bodies. K 
corp-as-slaynt, s. m. kind love and best 
respects.  
corrag, s. f. a hand in contempt, a crook made 
of the hand or fingers; a knob to hold by to 
turn a machine; pl. -yn.  
suggane-corrag, s. m. a straw rope made 
on the thumb. 
corragh, a. tottering, ready to fall.  
s’corragh, a. how tottering, comp. and sup. 
C 
feer chorragh, a. very tottering, or apt to 
fall. C 
corrid, s. m. caducity, aptness to fall or 
totter.  
corran, s. m. a sickle; pl. -yn. Prov. “Cha 
dooar rieau drogh veaynee corran mie.” 
[A bad reaper never got a good sickle.] 
yn chorran, s. the sickle. C 
lus y chorran, s. f. sickle weed. 
corree, s. f. anger, resentment; a. angry, 
displeased.  
yn chorree, s. the anger, or resentment. C  
s’corree, a. how angry or vexed, comp. and 
sup. C 
feer chorree, a. very angry, or displeased. 
C  
corrydank, a. crossly disposed.  
corrym, a. equal, even. See corm.  
corm, a. (a contraction of corrym), equal, 
equivalent, even, up to; s. m. satisfaction or 
revenge for something done, compensation. 
feer chorm or chorrym, a. very equal, or 
even. 
s’corm or s’corrym, a. how equal. C 
s’corrym. See corm. C 
s’cormey or s’corrymey, a. id., comp. & 
sup. C 
feer chorrym, a. very equal. See chorm. C  
co-chorrym, a. equal, equipoise. 
neu-chorrym, a. unequal, disproportionate. 
drogh-chorrym, s. f. (sic) foul play, evil 
treatment; Acts, vii. 19: Ghell eh shoh dy 
foalsey rish y chynney ain, as hug eh drogh-
chorrym da nyn ayraghyn, myr shen dy row ad 
êginit nyn gloan veggey y hilgey magh, dy ve 
stroit. The same dealt subtilly with our kindred, 
and evil entreated our fathers, so that they cast 
out their young children, to the end they might 
not live. 
corm, v. -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
chorm* or chorrym, v. id. [‘did equal’, 
‘did even’]; -agh; -aghey; -al; -ee; -ey; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. C  
chormee, v. did equalize, &c. C 
cormagh or cormal, v. making equal or 
even.  
cormaghey, v. equalising, making even.  
cormee, a. d. of equalising.  
cormit, 85. made equal, or even; Job, 
xxviii. 19: Cha bee topaz Ethiopia soylit 
huggey, chamoo vees eh cormit rish airh 
ghlen. The topaz of Ethiopia shall not equal it, 
neither shall it be valued with pure gold. 
s’cormit, a. how equalized. C 
cormid, s. m. equality, equivalence, 
equilibrium, evenness.  
90 
C 
 
yn chormid, s. the equality. C 
cormid-traa-arree, s. m. the spring or 
vernal equinox.  
cormid-traa-fouyr, s. m. the harvest, or 
autumnal equinox.  
cormyder, s. m. a chancellor; Ezra, iv. 8: 
Ren Rehum yn cormyder, as Shimshai yn 
scrudeyr screeuyn y yannoo noi Jerusalem, gys 
Artaxerxes y ree, er yn aght shoh. Rehum the 
chancellor and Shimshai the scribe wrote a 
letter against Jerusalem to Artaxerxes the king 
in this sort.  
corvaal, s. f. confusion, chaos.  
yn chorvaal, the confusion, chaos. C  
corvian, s. f. conceit.  
cosaayl, s. f. (from cosh and soieal) on the 
haunches. Soie-cosaayl is sitting with the 
haunches or hams on the calves of the legs; 
Ecclesiasticus, xxvi. [1]2: Bee ee cha 
jollyssagh as y troailtagh paagh, ta er daghyrt 
er ushtey: iuys ee ass dy chooilley phoyll ta ’sy 
roshtyn; hed ee er cosaayl fo dy chooilley 
hammag, as shin-y-mea da dy chooilley 
vaarderagh. She will open her mouth, as a 
thirsty traveller when he hath found a fountain, 
and drink of every water near her: by every 
hedge will she sit down, and open her quiver 
against every arrow.  
e chosaayl, s. his haunches; 
<Ecclesiasticus, xxvi. 12.> C  
cosn, cosne, or cossyn, v. gain, earn, win, 
escape, &c.; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -ey, 82; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
chosn or chosne, v. did gain or gained, did 
profit or earn; -agh, -ee, -ins, -it, -ym, 
-yms, -ys, 84. C  
cosney, s. m. gain, earnings, winnings, 
profit, emolument; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
dy chosney, v. to gain or earn. C 
cosnee, a. d. of gain or earnings.  
cosnit, 85. earned, gained, &c.  
s’cosnit, a. how gained or earned. C  
cosneyder, s. m. an earner, a gainer; pl. 
-yn.  
yn chosneyder, s. the gainer or earner. C  
cosoyl, v. compare, liken; -agh, 77: -ee, 80; 
-aghey, 82; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cosoyllagh, v. comparing. 
cosoyley, s. m. a comparison, metaphor, 
simile, &c.; pl. 67 [change -ey to -aghyn].  
cossyllagh, a. indifferent, passable, tolerable. 
In a middling state. This word may be from 
caslysagh, agreeable to the likeness you see 
it in. or from cosh (of a foot, able to go on 
foot).  
s’cossilagh, a. how indifferent. C 
s’cossilee, a. id., comp. and sup. C 
feer chossylagh, a. very tolerable. C  
cossyllid, s. m. tolerableness, passableness. 
cost, v. cost; -agh, 77; -al, 79; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88; s. m.  
chost, v. did cost; -agh, -ys, 94. C  
costal, a. costly, precious.  
s’costal or s’costalagh, a. how costly. C 
s’costalee, a. id., comp. and sup. C 
feer chostal, adv. very costly. C 
costrayl, s. f. a jar or large bottle.  
couch 
yn chouch, s. the coach. C  
cour, pre. towards, provided for.  
dty chour, pre. for thee, reserved for thee, 
provided for thee, towards; -s, id. em.  
my-chour, p. p. for me provided for me. 
cour-y-laa, a. daily, by the day, diurnal.  
cour-y-traa, a. as the time comes.  
clon-chour, s. m. the after-birth. 
couyr, s. m. cure, relief, remedy; pl. -yn. 
e chouyr, s. his cure or remedy. 
couyr, v. -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
my chouyragh; v. dy -al, my -in, -ins, -ym, 
-yms, -ys, 94. C 
couyral, v. recovering, getting in a state of 
convalescence; pl. -yn.  
couyreyder, s. m. a curer; pl. -yn.  
cowag, s. f. chat, loud talk, unintelligible 
discourse; pl. -yn.  
yn chowag, s. the loud chat or talk. C  
cowart, s. m. a coward.  
91 
C 
 
cowr, v. mark, note, signify, betoken; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
chowr* or chowree, v. did mark, or 
marked; betoken, signify, represent; -agh, 
-aghey, -in, -ins, -it, -ym, -yms, -ys, 94. C 
cowraghey, v. mark, signifying, 
betokening, representing.  
cowrit, 85. marked, signified.  
s’cowrit, a. how marked. C  
cowrey, s. m. a mark, token, sign, 
symptom; pl. 67 [change -ey to -aghyn].  
yn chowrey, s. the mark, sign, token, 
symptom. C 
cowree, a. d. of a mark or marks, or 
signifying.  
cowreyder, s. m. a marker, one who marks.  
yn chowreyder, s. the marker, &c. C  
cowree, s. f. sowins, flummery; pl. -yn. 
yn chowree, s. the sowins. C  
cowryn 
e chowryn, s. his effects or treasure; Jer. 
xv. 13: Dty chooid as dty chowryn livrey-ym 
son spooilley nastee, as shen son ooilley dty 
pheccaghyn, eer ayns ooilley dty ardjyn. Thy 
substance and thy treasures will I give to the 
spoil without price, and that for all thy sins, 
even in all thy borders. C  
coyrd, s. m. a cord; Josh. ii. 15: Eisht lhig ee 
sheese ad er coyrd trooid yn uinniag: son va’n 
thie eck er voalley yn valley, as v’ee cummal er 
y voalley. Then she let them down by a cord 
through the window: for her house was upon 
the town wall, and she dwelt upon the wall; pl. 
-yn.  
yn chord or choyrd, s. the cord. C 
coyrl or coyrlee, v. advise, counsel, persuade; 
-agh, 77; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
choyrl* or choyrlee, v. did advise or 
counsel; -agh, -aghey, -in, -ins, -it, -ym, 
-yms, -ys, 94. C  
coyrlagh noi, v. dissuading.  
coyrlaghey, v. advising, counselling, 
persuading, &c.  
coyrlit, 85. advised, counselled.  
s’coyrlit, a. how advised or counselled. C 
coyrle, s. 
e choyrle, s. his advice or counsel. C  
coyrlee, a. d. of advice or counsel.  
choyrlee, a. d. of advice or counsel. C  
fer-coyrlee 
fir-choyrlee, s. pl. counsellors. 
ir-choyrlee, s. counsellors. F 
coyrleyder, s. m. an adviser. See also fer 
coyrlee.  
e choyrleyder, s. his adviser, &c. C  
coyrt, v. giving, sending, putting, &c. See 
also, curt, which is seldom used.  
curt, v. giving, putting, sending, &c. See 
also coyrt.  
er choyrt, v. hath, &c. given, put, sent, &c. 
C  
eh ta dy my choyrt, he who has sent me. 
coyrt-dy-cheilley or coyrt-cooidjagh, v. 
joining.  
craa, v. shaking, trembling, quaking; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88. Prov. “T’ad craa nyn moyrn er 
y ch[ei]lley.” [They are shaking their pride 
on each other.] [Cf. creau.] 
crie, v. shake; -agh, 77; -ee 80; -in, 83; 
-ym, 86; -ys, 88. See also craa; the both are 
used.  
chraa or chrie, v. did shake, quake, or 
tremble; -agh, -in, -ins, -it, -ym, -yms, -ys, 
94. C  
chrie or chraa, v. did shake, shook; Acts. 
xii. 17: Agh chrie eshyn e laue orroo ad dy ve 
nyn dhost. But he, beckoning unto them with 
the hand to hold their peace. C 
craait, 85. shook, shaken.  
criht, 85. shook, shaken.  
ro chriet, 85, too shook or shaken. C 
craader, s. m. a shaker, &c.; pl. -yn.  
yn chraader, s. the shaker. C 
craa-hallooin, s. m. an earthquake.  
yn chraa-hallooin, s. the earthquake. C  
cron-craaee, s. f. aspen tree. See also 
chengey ny mraane. 
crackan, s. m. skin, peel, rind; pl. -yn.  
yn chrackan, s. the skin; Prov. “Cre yiow 
jeh’n chayt agh y chrackan” [What will 
you get of the cat but the skin?]; and 
“Faggys ta my lheiney agh ny sniessey ta 
my chrackan.” [Near is my shirt, but nearer 
92 
C 
 
is my skin.] C  
craitnyn, s. pl. skins, peels. 
craitnagh, a. d. of skin or skins.  
chraitnagh, a. d. of skin or skins; as, ollan 
chraitnagh [skin wool]. C 
s’craitnagh, a. how skinny, full of skins. C 
s’craitnee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
pabyr-craitnagh, s. parchment. 
craitnag, s. f. a bat; pl. -yn.  
yn chraitnag, s. the bat. C  
cragh or craght, s. f. carnage, slaughter, 
destruction, crash, spoil, prey. “Share 
cragh ve sy çheer, na mee ny mannan çheet 
stiagh meein.” [Destruction in the country 
is better than the month of the kids (March) 
coming in fair.] 
yn chraght, s. the slaughter, carnage, 
destruction, or ruin. C  
dy chraghey, v. to slaughter, slay, destroy. 
C  
craghit, 85. destroyed, slain.  
cragheyder, s. m. a destroyer, slaughterer, 
spoiler, &c.; pl. -yn; Jer. li. 53: Ga dy 
jinnagh Babylon troggal seose ee hene gys 
niau, as ga dy jinnagh ee niartaghey yrjid yn 
troshid eck, ny-yeih voym’s hig cragheyderyn 
urree, ta’n Chiarn dy ghra. Though Babylon 
should mount up to heaven, and though she 
should fortify the height of her strength, yet 
from me shall spoilers come unto her, saith the 
Lord.  
yn chragheyder, s. the slayer, slaughterer, 
spoiler, or destroyer. C  
craid, s. f. mockery, scoffery, irony. 
Prov. “Eshyn yiow skeilley, yiow eh craid.” 
[He who receives harm shall receive 
mockery (be mocked).] 
yn chraid, s. the mockery or derision. 
craid, v. mock, scoff, &c.; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88.  
chraid, v. [did] mock, deride; -agh, -in, 
-ins, -it, -ym, -yms, -ys, 94. C  
craidey, v. mocking, scoffing, ridiculing.  
dy chraidey, v. to mock, to scoff, &c. C  
craidit, 85. mocked. This word is seldom 
used but as t’eh craidit er (he is mocked 
at). 
craideyder or craidoilagh, s. m. a mocker, 
scoffer, &c.  
yn chraideyder, s. the mocker, &c. C  
craidoilagh, a. in a scoffing, mocking 
manner.  
s’c[r]aidoilagh, a. how much for scoffing 
or mocking. C 
s’craidoilee, a. id., comp. and sup. C 
feer chraidoilagh, adv. very scoffingly. 
craiu, s. m. an iron crow or lever; pl. -nyn.  
yn chraiu, s. the crow-bar. C 
craiu, v. corrode, eating away; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -it, 85; -ys, 88.  
chraau, v. did corrode or eat away; -agh; 
-ys. C  
craiuaig 
yn chraiuaig (sic: stress), s. what is fallen 
in a ruinous state. C 
craiuaigagh 
s’craiuaigagh, a. how ruinous. C 
s’craiuaigee, a. id., comp. and sup. C 
crammag, s. f. a snail.  
yn chrammag s. the snail. C 
crummeeyn, s. pl. snails; the pl. of 
crammag.  
e chrumeeyn, s. pl. his snails. C 
cramman, s. m. a lump, bulb, or button; pl. 
-yn.  
yn chramman, s. the lump, the bulb or 
button. C  
lus y c[h]ramman doo, s. f. knapweed or 
button wort. 
crammanagh, a. lumpy, bulbous.  
s’cram[m]anagh, a. how lumpy. C 
s’crammanee, a. id., comp. and sup. C 
feer chrammanagh, a. very lumpy. C  
crammaney, v. taking bulbs or lumps.  
dy chrammaney, v. to bulb, &c. C 
cramp, a. intricate, complicated.  
feer chramp, a. very intricate. C 
cramp, s. m. plague; -yn  
yn chramp, s. the plague. C  
cran[-]tessen, s. m. diameter; pl. -yn.  
crank or cronk, s. m. a knock, or sound of a 
blow, written in the Manks Scriptures 
cronk; but as crank is the sound used, and 
93 
C 
 
as cronk rather confounds it with cronk 
(hill), this is inserted. 
crank, v. -agh, 77; -al, 79; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ym, 86; -ys, 88.  
crankit, 85. cracked, distracted, knocked.  
crankeyder, s. m. a knocker; pl. -yn.  
crannag, s. f. a pulpit; pl. -yn.  
crapl or craplee, v. crumple, wrinkle, cockle; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
chrapl* or chraplee, v. did crumple or 
wrinkle; -agh; -ee; -in, 94. C  
crapley, crumpling, wrinkling, &c.  
dy chrapley, v. to wrinkle or crumple. C 
craplit, 85. crumpled, wrinkled, cockled.  
s’craplit, a. how crumpled. C 
craplag, s. f. a crumple, wrinkle, or crease; 
pl. -yn. Prov. “Ta craplag smoo ayns dty 
hoyn nish na va ro’ee.” [There is a bigger 
wrinkle in your breech than there was 
before.] 
yn chraplag, s. the wrinkle or crumple. C  
craplagh, a. full of wrinkles, &c.  
s’craplagh, a. how much crumpled, &c. C 
s’craplee, a. id., comp. and sup. C 
crapleyder, s. m. a crumpler, &c.; pl. -yn.  
cratçh 
yn chratçh, s. the crib, the stall. C 
crattagh 
coar-chrattagh, s. f. a snipe; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee]. 
craue, s. f. a bone; pl. -yn.  
yn chraue, s. the bone; Prov. “Myr 
sniessey da’n chraue s’miljey yn eill.” [The 
nearer to the bone, the sweeter the flesh.] C  
lieh-chraue, s. f. a gristle.  
craueagh, a. bony, having bones.  
s’craueagh, a. how bony, comp. and sup. C 
feer chraueagh, a. very bony. C  
gorley-crauagh or -crouagh, s. a disease 
in the feet or hoofs of cattle. 
craue-feeagh, s. m. a scald crow; pl. craue-
fiee.  
yn chraue-feeagh, s. the scald crow. C 
crauee, a. religious, pious, godly. This word 
is most likely cra from craa (to shake), and 
uee from guee (to pray, or beseech), as the 
head is generally shook by some when 
speaking on solemn subjects.  
s’crauee, a. how pious, religious, godly, 
holy, righteous, comp. and sup. C 
feer chrauee, a. very religious, pious, &c.  
meechrauee, a. ungodly, wicked; s. pl. 
irreligious persons. 
crauee-oalsey, s. pl. hypocrites.  
fer-crauee-oalsey 
yn er-crauee-oalsey, s. m. the hypocrite; 
Job, xxxiv. 30: Nagh lhisagh yn er-crauee-
oalsey reill, er aggle dy beagh y pobble er ny 
hayrn ayns ribbey. That the hypocrite reign not, 
lest the people be ensnared. F 
craueeaght, s. m. religion, piety, godliness, 
holiness; Heb. xii. 14: Eiyr-jee da shee rish 
dy chooilley ghooinney, as da craueeaght, 
n’egooish cha vod dooinney erbee yn Chiarn y 
akin. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, 
without which no man shall see the Lord. The 
word craueeys is improperly substituted by 
some.  
e chraueeaght, s. his religion or holiness. 
craueeaght-foalsey, s. hypocrisy, false 
piety.  
craunsh 
yn chraunsh, s. the crush with teeth. C 
cray, s. f. clay or marl. 
yn chray, s. the clay or marl. C 
craie, a. d. of clay, made of clay.  
chraie, a. d. of clay or marl. C  
fir-chraie, s. pl. potters; 1 Chron. iv. 23: 
V’ad shoh fir-chraie, as adsyn va cummal 
mastey ny garaghyn-feeyney, as magheryn. 
These were the potters, and those that dwelt 
among plants and hedges. 
crayee, a. d. of clay or marl; tho’ craie is 
used; this is also in Mark, vii. 4: As ta 
ymmodee dy reddyn elley, t’ad er ghoaill orroo 
dy reayll, niee cappanyn as siyn crayee, siyn 
prashey as buird. And many other things there 
be, which they have received to hold, as the 
washing of cups, and pots, brasen vessels, and 
of tables.  
cray, v. clay, &c.; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
crayt 
s’crayt, a. how clayed. C 
94 
C 
 
craieagh, a. clayey, partaking of clay.  
s’craieagh, a. how clayey. C 
feer chraieagh, a. very clayey. C  
crea, s. f. creed, the heads or tenets of faith or 
belief; pl. -ghyn.  
yn chrea, s. the creed, faith or belief. C 
creagh, s. f. a furrow; pl. -yn.  
yn chreagh, s. the furrow. C 
creaghey, v. furrowing.  
creaghit, 85. furrowed.  
gall-chre<e>agh, s. f. or it may be goal-
chre<e>agh, the ending furrow. 
creagh, s. f. a stack; pl. -yn.  
yn chreagh, s. the stack. C 
creaghey, v. stacking.  
creaghit, 85. stacked.  
creaghlagh, s. f. the herb sage.  
yn chreaghlagh, s. the sage. C  
creau, v. trembling; as, er-creau, (trembleth, 
quaketh); Job, xxxvii. 1: Er shoh myrgeddin 
ta my chree er-creau, as er ny lhaggaghey 
ayns my chleeau. At this also my heart 
trembleth, and is moved out of his place. [cf. 
craa] 
er-creau, v. trembling, shuddering, 
quivering; Hab. iii. 16: Tra cheayll mee, va 
my chree traishtit: va my veillyn er-creau ec yn 
choraa: ren loauid greimmey my chraueyn, as 
va mee ooilley er-creau. When I heard, my 
belly trembled; my lips quivered at the voice: 
rottenness entered into my bones, and I 
trembled in myself. 
creayn, s. m. ague, the shaking or 
trembling sickness.  
e chreayn, s. his ague. C  
crayn-losht, s. m. burning ague; Lev. xxvi. 
16: …lhiam erriu atchim, consumption, as 
crayn-losht, ver naardey’n soilshey, as cur 
sneih er y chree. I will even appoint over you 
terror, consumption, and the burning ague, that 
shall consume the eyes, and cause sorrow of 
heart.  
creayn-voddee, s. f. the herb dog’s 
mercury.  
creanagh, a. chilly, shaking with cold.  
s’creanagh, a. how chilly or cold. C 
s’creanee, id., comp. and sup. C 
creck, v. sell, dispose of by sale; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
chreck, v. did sell, sold; -agh, 94. C 
creckit, 85. sold, vended, made sale of.  
s’creckit, a. how sold. C 
creck, s. m. a sale; pl. -yn.  
bargane creck, s. m. a deed of sale. 
creckeyder, s. m. a seller; pl. -yn.  
yn chreckeyder, s. the seller. C 
cred or creid, v. believe, give credit; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 
86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
c<h>redj* or chredjys [rel. fut.], v. 
believe; -agh; -in: -ins; -it; -ym; -yms, 94. 
C  
chred* or chreid, v. did believe or 
believed; -agh; -al: -in; -ins, 94 C  
credjal, v. believing, crediting.  
er ny chredjal, v. believed on. C  
meech[r]edjal, v. disbelieving. 
credit 
s’credit, a. how much believed. C 
credjue, s. m. faith, belief, credence.  
yn chredjue, s. the faith, or belief. Cre’n 
chredjue t’eh jeh? (What religion or faith is 
he of?) C  
meechredjue, s. m. unbelief, incredulity. 
credjaltee, s. pl. believers. This as well as 
the plural of credjuagh is used.  
credjuagh, s. m. a believer; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee].  
yn chredjuagh, s. the believer. C  
anchredjuagh, s. m. an unbeliever; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. 
e chredjalee or chredjuee, s. pl. his 
believers. C 
cree, s. f. heart; pl. -aghyn. Prov. “Ta cree 
dooie ny share na kione croutagh.” [A kind 
heart is better than a crafty head.] 
yn chree, s. the heart. C  
my chree’s, s. my heart, em. C  
daah-cree, s. m. heart burn. 
creeagh, a. d. of the heart or hearts.  
chreeagh, a. d. of the heart; as, trome 
chreeagh (heavy hearted or heavy of heart); 
or, çhing chreeagh (sick of heart). C  
cree-brisht, s. m. a broken heart.  
95 
C 
 
ard-chreeagh, a. haughty, highminded. 
lhag-chreeagh, a. faint-hearted. 
mie-chree[a]gh, a. well disposed, good 
hearted. 
creeoil, a. hearty. 
dy creeoil, adv. heartily.  
s’creeoil, a. how hearty, comp. and sup. C 
feer chreeoil, a. very hearty or full of 
spirits. C  
creeoilid or creeoilys, s. m. heartiness, 
vigour.  
e chreeoilid, s. his heartiness. C  
creear, s. f. a sieve, searce; bolter; pl. -yn. 
yn chreear, s. the sieve, searce or bolter.  
creear, v. sift, searce; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-ey, 82; -in, S3; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
chreear, v. did sift or sifted; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94, C  
dy chreearey, v. to sift or searce. C  
creearit or creeart, 85. sifted, &c.  
s’creeart or screert, a. how sifted. C 
feer chreeart, a. very much sifted. C  
creeareyder, s. m. a sifter, &c.; pl. -yn.  
yn chreeareyder, s. the sifter. C  
creedlagh or creetlagh, s. m. shrugging, 
shifting, or moving the shoulder in the 
clothes.  
dy chreedlagh, v. to shrug or scrub.  
creen, a. ripe, withered. 
creeney, a. pl. ripe, withered; as, magheryn 
creeney (ripe fields).  
s’creen, a. how ripe or withered, comp. & 
sup. C 
ro chreen, a. too ripe, withered or mature. 
C  
meeyl chreen, s. f. a small worm or grub 
that eats away timber, also one that burrows 
under a person’s skin and causes great itch, 
and on which is the following couplet:  
“Dy beagh ee er e bolg myr t’ee er e 
dreeym, 
Shimmey mac dooinney yinnagh ee harrish 
y cheym.”  
[If it were on its belly as it is on its back, 
many a son of man would it do over the 
stile.] 
neu-chreen, a. unripe, unwithered. 
creen, v. wither, ripen; -agh, 77; -ee, 80: 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
chreen* or chreenee, v. did ripen, &c. 
-agh; -aghey; -ys; 94.  
creenaghey, v. ripening, withering.  
creent, 85. ripened, withered.  
ro chreent, 85. too withered. C  
creenid, s. m. 89. ripeness.  
creeney, a. wise, provident. Prov. “Ta 
dooinney creeney mennick jannoo carrey 
jeh e noid.” [A wise man often makes a 
friend of his enemy.] 
s’creeney, a. how wise, more or most wise. 
C 
feer chreeney, a. very wise. C  
neu-chreeney, a. unwise, simple. 
raa-creeney, s. m. a wise saying, a proverb; 
pl. raaghyn-creeney. 
creenaght, s. f. wisdom; pl. -yn.  
e chreenaght s. his wisdom. C  
Creest, s. m. Christ; pl. -yn.  
fuill Chreest, s. blood of Christ. C 
keym-Chreest, s. f. the herb centuary. 
moylley Chreest, praise to Christ. 
Creestee, s. m. a Christian; pl. -yn or -nyn.  
yn Chreestee, s. the Christian. C 
anchreestee, s. m. a heathen, infidel, 
pagan. 
Creesteeagh[t], s. m. Sacrament of the 
Lord’s Supper; pl. -yn.  
yn Chreesteeaght, s. the Sacrament of the 
Lord’s Supper. C  
Creestiaght, s. m. Christianity.  
e Chreesteeaght, s. his Christianity. C 
anchreestiagh[t], s. m. heathenism, 
infidelity. 
creg or cregg*, s. f. a rock; pl. -yn.  
yn chreg, s. the rock. C  
scriss-ny-greg, s. f. a moss that grows on 
rocks, and is used in dying red. 
creggey, a. d. of the rock or rocks.  
sheean chreggey, a. d. the noise or sound 
of the sea on rocks, of the rock or rocks. C  
creggagh, a. rocky, having rocks.  
s’creggagh, a. how rocky. C 
s’creggee, a. id., comp. and sup. C 
feer chreggagh, a. very rocky. C 
96 
C 
 
creggan, s. m. a place or piece of ground 
left uncultivated in consequence of being 
rocky or containing stones; generally 
overgrown with gorse or underwood.  
yn chreggan, s. the rocky place. C  
cregganagh 
s’cregganagh, a. how full of small rock, 
&c, &c. C 
s’cregganee, a. id., comp. and sup. C 
creiu, v. ruining.  
chreiu, v. did ruin or crush. -in; -ins; -yms: 
-ys, 94. C 
creujit, 85. ruined, crushed. 
yn chreiueyder, s. the ruiner, &c. C 
crem, s. a sore or ailment; pl. -yn.  
yn chrem, s. the defect or sore. C  
cremagh, a. diseased with sores, &c.  
cremeyder, s. m. a fault finder, a critic; pl. 
-yn.  
creoï, a. hard, obdurate; close, near.  
s’creoï, a. how hard, obdurate or obstinate, 
comp. and sup. C 
creoï-wannallagh, a. stiff-necked.  
creoi or creogh, v. make hard or harden; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
creogh or creoigh, v. id., &c.  
chreoï or chreogh, v. did harden. C 
creoighey or creoghey, v. hardening.  
creoït, 85. hardened.  
creoighys, s. m. hardship; pl. -syn.  
creoigheyder 
yn chreoigheyder, s. the hardener. C 
creoidey, a. hardy, daring, firm.  
s’croidey, a. how hardy, comp. and sup. C 
creoidys, s. m. hardiness, daringness, &c. 
cretoor, s. m. a creature; pl. -yn.  
cretoor bio, an animal.  
yn chretoor, the creature. C  
crib or cribb*, v. curb, contract, shrink; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
chribb, v. did cringe, contract, or shrink, 
-agh; -ee; -in; -ins; -it, 94. C 
cribbey, v. contracting, shrinking in or up.  
dy chribbey, v. to contract or shrink. C  
cribbit, 85. contracted, shrunk.  
s’cribbit, a. how shrunk or contracted. C 
cribbidjagh, a. parsimonious, niggardly, 
&c.  
s’cribbeyjagh, a. how niggardly, 
parsimonious, or penurious. C 
s’cribbeyjee, a. more niggardly, most 
niggardly. C 
ro chribbidjagh, a. too niggardly or stingy.  
cribbag, s. f. a loop of rope put round a 
thing to hoist it by.  
cribban, s. m. a loop of rope to put on a 
wrestive beast’s fore leg to hold it double.  
yn chribban, s. the curb. C  
cribbaghyn, s. m. a silver sixpence is so 
called in ludicrous talk.  
criggyl, s. f. a cripple; pl. -yn or 76 [criggil].  
crinkyl, s. m. a loop in the edge of a sail.  
crivassan, s. m. a shrunk or contracted 
creature; a dwarf; pl. -yn.  
criy, s. f. gallows; pl. -aghyn or -yn.  
yn chriy, s. the gallows. C 
cro 
croiyn, s. pl. nuts; reeds.  
e chroyn, s. pl. his nuts. C  
croae, s. f. an eye of a needle; the notch of an 
arrow to admit the bow string.  
yn chroae, s. the eye of a needle, &c. C 
croag, s. fang, talon, claw, clutch; pl. -yn.  
yn chroag, s. the fang, talon, or clutch. C 
croag-partan, s. f. water seagrum; crab’s 
claws.  
croagane, s. f. a crook or hook; pl. -yn; Ez. 
xl. 43: As cheu-sthie va croaganeyn lheead 
bassey soit runt mygeayrt, as er ny buird va feill 
yn oural. And within were hooks, an hand 
broad, fastened round about: and upon the 
tables was the flesh of the offering.  
yn chroagane, s. the crook. C 
croaganeagh, a. having a crook or crooks.  
s’cro[a]ganagh, a. how hooked. C 
s’cro[a]ganee, a. id., comp. and sup. C 
feer chroaganeagh, a. very full of crooks. 
C  
croaglagh, s. as much as can be brought in 
the fangs or clutches, or in the hand or 
97 
C 
 
hands, in contempt.  
yn chroaglagh, s. the handful, in contempt. 
croaghan, s. m. a gadfly; a cratching; pl. -yn.  
yn chroaghan, s. the clegg or gadfly. C  
croan or cron, s. m. a mast.  
yn chroan or chron, s. the mast. C 
cruin, s. pl. masts.  
e chruin, s. pl. his masts. C  
cron-craaee, s. f. aspen tree. See also 
çhengey ny mraane.  
croan[-]reisht, s. f. amradulsa, a species of 
night shade, the decoction of which is said 
to be good for the healings of inward 
bruises.  
croan[-]scoidey, s. m. a boom.  
yn chron-scoidey, s. the boom. C  
croan[-]spreie, s. m. a bowsprit.  
yn chron-spreie, s. the bowsprit. C  
yn chron-togherys, s. the winding blades.  
cronnag, s. m. a round top on the mast of a 
vessel, the crosstree; pl. -yn.  
crobage, s. f. a boiled claw or foot; pl. -yn.  
yn chrobage, s. the claw. C 
crockan, s. m. a crock; pl. -yn.  
yn chrockan, s. the crock. C 
crockan eeymmey (a crock of butter) 
crodane, s. m. a gurnet; pl. -yn.  
yn chrodane, s. the gurnet. C 
croe, s. f. a coop; an iron to put under a pot or 
griddle on the fire.  
yn chroe, s. the pen or coop. C  
crogh, v. hang, suspend<ed>; -agh; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
chrogh, v. did hang or hung; -agh; -in; -ys, 
94. C  
croghey, v. hanging, suspending.  
dy chroghey, v. to hang or suspend. C 
croghee, a. d. of hanging or suspension.  
fer c<h>roghee, s. a hangman. C  
croghit, 85. hung or hanged.  
s’croghit, a. how hung. C 
crogheyder, s. m. a hanger; pl. -yn.  
yn chrogheyder, s. the hanger. C 
croiaght, s. f. incest; Lev. xviii. 17: Cha jean 
oo roostey nearey ben as e inneen, chamoo 
ghoys oo inneen e mac, ny inneen e inneen, dy 
roostey yn nearey eck: son ad ny mraane-
mooinjerey faggys eck: she croiaght eh. Thou 
shalt not uncover the nakedness of a woman 
and her daughter, neither shalt thou take her 
son’s daughter, or her daughter’s daughter, to 
uncover her nakedness; for they are her near 
kinswomen: it is wickedness.  
yn chroiaght, s. the incest. C  
croiaghtagh, a. incestuous.  
croit, s. f. a croft; pl. -yn.  
cron, s. m. a scar or cicatrice; a stain; pl. -yn.  
cronk, s. m. a hill, or mount; or knock. See 
crank for the latter.  
crink or croink, s. pl. hills, mounts.  
croink, s. pl. hills, mounts. See also crink; 
Isa. xli. 15: …nee oo tasteraght ny sleityn, as 
broo ad dy myn, as nee oo ny croink myr coau. 
…thou shalt thresh the mountains, and beat 
them small, and shalt make the hills as chaff. 
e chrink or chroink, s. pl. his hills. C 
Cronk-Keeillown, s. m. John’s Church-hill 
or the hill of John’s Church; called also 
Tynwald Hill; is situate about three miles 
from Peel, in the parish of German, on the 
main road to Douglas. No doubt but the 
latter part of this word is a corruption of 
Ean or Yuan (John). This is the hill or 
mount on which the constituted authorities 
promulgate all their Statute Laws, in Manks 
and English, to the people.  
crongan 
cronganagh 
s’cronganagh, a. how full of hillocks. C 
s’cronganee, a. id., comp. and sup. C 
cronn, v. descry, discern, perceive; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
chron, chronn*, or chronnee, v. did 
descry, discern, or behold; -agh, 94. C  
cronnaghey, v. discovereth, discovering, 
discerneth, &c.  
dy chronnaghey, v. to descry, discern. C  
cronnit, 85. discerned, descried.  
s’cronnit, a. how seen, discerned, beheld. 
C 
cronnal, a. evident, visible, obvious, 
conspicuous, manifest; eminent, notable, 
plain, famous.  
98 
C 
 
s’cronnal, a. how plain, obvious, evident, 
manifest, visible, conspic[u]ous, easily 
seen, comp. and sup. C 
feer chronnal, a. very plain, obvious. C  
cronneyder, s. m. a descrier or discerner.  
yn chronneyder, s. the discerner, &c. C  
cronnag, s. f. a rock that can be seen before 
low water; pl. -yn.  
cronney, s. m. portion, fate, destiny.  
e chronney, s. his portion, share, fate. C  
cront, s. m. a knot. 
cruint, s. pl. knots; the pl. of cront.  
cront banee (a binding knot) 
cront-kione-kiark, s. m. a knot made by 
putting the two ends together as if one, and 
turning a knot on.  
cront-fidderagh, s. m. a weaver’s knot.  
cront, v. knot; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in 83; 
-ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
chront, v. did knot; -agh; -al, 94. C  
crontal, [v]. knotting, binding with a knot.  
dy chrontey or chrontal, v. to knot or bulb. 
C  
crontit, 85. knotted.  
s’crontit, a. how knotted. C 
ro chronti[t], 85, too knotted. C  
crontagh, a. knotty, full of knots.  
s’crontagh, a. how knotty. C 
s’crontee, a. more knotty, most knotty. C 
feer chrontagh, a. very knotty. C  
crontid, s. m. knottiniess or knottedness.  
yn chrontid, s. the knottiness. C  
cronteyder 
yn chronteyder, s. the knotter. C  
croo or crooaght, s. creation. 
yn chroo or yn chrooaght, s. the creation 
or created nature. C 
fer-croo, s. m. creator. 
nyn ver-croo, s. our, &c., creator. 
croo, v. create; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
chroo, v. did create, created: -agh; -ys, 94. 
C  
er chroo, v. hath, &c. created. C 
crooit, 85. created.  
croodagh, s. m. creator. This word is used 
by the translator of the Manks Paradise 
Lost. Fer croo, I think, is the most proper 
term, which see.  
yn chroodagh, s. See fer-croo. C  
croo, v. crawling in grubs, maggots, or 
vermin.  
crooag, s. f. a grub or maggot; pl. -yn.  
yn chrooag, s. the grub or maggot. C 
croobagh, a. lame, crippled; s. m. a lame 
animal; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
s’croobagh, a. how lame. C 
s’croobee, a. more lame, most lame. C 
feer chroobagh, a. very lame. C  
leshtal croobagh, s. a lame excuse. 
e chroobee, s. pl. his lame ones. C  
croobid, s. m. lameness.  
e chroobid, s. his lameness. C 
crosh, s. f. a cross or crucifix; a hand reel; the 
figure of a cross sent round the parish by 
the Captain to assemble the people; pl. -yn.  
yn chrosh, s. the cross, crucifix; the reel. C  
croshey, a. d. of the cross.  
lus ny c<h>roshey, s. f. cudwort, cotton 
weed, chaffweed, or dwarf cotton. 
crosh, v. cross, thwart; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ym, 86; -ys, 88.  
crosee, v. will, &c. cross, &c.  
crosey, v. crossing, intersecting, crucifying.  
dy chrossey, v. to cross, crucify; to 
intersect, to cancel. C  
crost, 85. thwarted, cancelled.  
crossan, s. m. coral; pl. -yn.  
crottag 
yn chrottag, s. the curlew. C  
crou, s. f. a horse shoe or the shoe of a beast; 
the iron band on the felloe of a wheel; the 
pl. of the former is -yn, and the latter 
-ghyn, 1 Kings, vii. 33: As va obbyr ny 
queeylyn casley rish obbyr queeyl fainagh; va 
ny essylyn oc, as ny rhollanyn oc, as ny 
croughyn oc, as ny spakyn oc ooilley roit. And 
the work of the wheels was like the work of a 
chariot wheel: their axletrees, and their naves, 
and their felloes, and their spokes, were all 
molten.  
yn chrou* or chrow, s. the horse-shoe; the 
iron circle of a wheel; pl. -ghyn. C  
crow-cheyt, s. f. the herb bird’s foot.  
crou, v. shoe; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
99 
C 
 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
s’crowit, a. how shod. C 
crout, s. f. a trick, craft, stratagem.  
yn chrout, s. the trick or stratagem. C 
croutagh, a. crafty, trickish, cunning, 
subtle; s. m. a crafty subtle person; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]; Job, v. 12: T’eh tilgey 
bun-ry-skyn saaseyn ny croutee, myr shen 
nagh jarg ad cooilleeney ny t’ad dy ghoaill ayns 
laue. He disappointeth the devices of the crafty, 
so that their hands cannot perform their 
enterprise.  
s’croutagh, a. crafty or subtle. C 
s’croutee, a. id., comp. and sup. C 
feer chroutagh, a. very trickish or crafty C 
croutid, s. m. 89. craftiness, cunningness.  
e chroutid or chroutys, s. his craftiness or 
craft; 1 Cor. iii. 19: Son ta creenaght y theihll 
shoh ommijys marish Jee: son te scruit, T’eh 
goaill yn vooinjer chreeney ayns y chroutys oc 
hene. For the wisdom of this world is 
foolishness with God. For it is written, He taketh 
the wise in their own craftiness. C 
crouw, s. f. a bunch growing on one stem or 
stalk; a clue; pl. -yn or -ghyn.  
yn chrow or chrouw, s. the bunch or bush 
of shrub growing on one stem. C 
crow, v. hover; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
chrow, v. did hover or hovered. 
crowal, v. hovering, craving.  
dy chrowal, v. to hover, to crave. C  
crowaltagh, s. m. a craver, a claimant, a 
dunner; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
yn chrowaltagh, s. the craver, claimant. C 
croym, a. 
s’croym, a. how stooped or bent forward, 
comp. and sup. C 
croym or croymm*, v. bow, bend, stoop; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -ey, 82; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
chroym or chroymm, v. did stoop or bow, 
stooped; -agh; -in; -ins, 94. C  
dy chroymmey, v. to stoop or bow. C  
croymmit, 85. bowed, stooped, bent 
downwards.  
croymmeyder, s. m. one that bows or 
stoops.  
cruetçh, v. cower, stoop; -agh, 77; &c., -ys, 
88. 
cruetçhal, v. cowering, stooping.  
cruetçhit, 85. cowered, stooped.  
cruick 
sy chruick, s. in the bucket; Isa. xl. 15: Cur-
my-ner, ta ny ashoonyn myr bine ’sy chruick, 
as t’ad coontit myr brinneen ayns ny 
meihaghyn. Behold, the nations are as a drop 
of a bucket, and are counted as the small dust 
of the balance. C 
cruill, s. f. a curve; pl. -yn.  
yn chruill, s. the curve.  
cruillagh, a. having a curve or curves, 
curvy.  
cruin or cring, a. close, compact.  
s’cruin or s’cruing, a. how compact or 
close. C 
dy cruin, adv. closely, compactly.  
feer chruin or chring, [a.] <v.> very close, 
compact. C 
cruinn, v. close, compact, besiege; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
chruinn, v. did close, &c.; -agh, 94. 
cruinnaghey, v. closing, making compact, 
besieging.  
dy chruinnaghey, v. to besiege; &c. C  
er chruinnaght, v. hath, &c. besieged. C  
cruinnit, 85. closed, made compact, 
besieged, surrounded.  
s’cruinnit, a. how besieged or closed. C 
feer chruinnit, 85. very closed or besieged. 
C  
co-chruin or cochruinee, v. congregate, 
assemble in a multitude, besiege. 
cruinagh 
yn chruinagh, s. the close multitude. C  
yn chruinneyder, s. the besieger. C  
cruinnid, s. m. closeness, compactness.  
yn chruinnid, s. the closeness, &c. C  
cruinn, a. round; Psl. xcviii. 8: Lhig da’n 
faarkey feiyr y yannoo, as ooilley ny t’ayn: yn 
seihll cruin, as adsyn ta baghey ayn. Let the 
sea make a noise, and all that therein is: the 
round world, and they that dwell therein. 
clagh-chruin, s. a pebble. 
cruinney, s. m. a globe, orb or sphere, the 
100 
C 
 
earth as it is one; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
crooinney, s. m. creation, the earth. This 
orthography is used Exod. xxxiv. 10: Cur-
my-ner, ta mee jannoo conaant; kiongoyrt rish 
ooilley dty phobble neem’s mirrillyn, nyn lheid 
as nagh row rieau jeant er feai-ny-crooinney, 
ny ayns ashoon erbee. Behold, I make a 
covenant: before all thy people I will do 
marvels, such as have not been done in all the 
earth, nor in any nation.  
yn chruinney, s. the globe, ball, sphere, 
orb. C  
oirr-cruin[n]ey, s. m. the horizon. 
cruinlagh, s. m. an orbit; pl. 72 [change 
-agh to -eeyn]. 
cruinag, s. m. crown of a hat; pl. -yn.  
yn chruinag, s. the crown of a hat. C  
cruisht or cruishtin, s. m. a pitcher or pail; 
pl. -yn.  
yn c<h>ruisht or c<h>ruishtin, s. the 
pitcher or pail; Eccl. xii. 6: Roish my vees yn 
coyrd argid er ny eaysley, ny’n saagh airh er ny 
vrishey, ny’n cruishtin brisht ec y chibbyr, ny’n 
whueeyl brisht ec yn arrey. Or ever the silver 
cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, 
or the pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the 
wheel broken at the cistern. C 
cruittag, s. f. a hump backed person; pl. -yn.  
yn chruittag, s. the hump back person. C  
cruittagh, a. crooked or hump backed; Lev. 
xxi. 20: Ny fer cruittagh, ny fer faase, ny fer 
cam-hooillagh, ny ta fo taghys-chirrym ny 
screbbagh, ny ta’n grenns echey brisht. Or 
crookbackt, or a dwarf, or that hath a blemish in 
his eye, or be scurvy, or scabbed, or hath his 
stones broken.  
s’cruittagh, a. how hump backed. C 
s’cruittee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
feer chruittagh, a. very hump backed. C  
cruittid, s. m. humpishness.  
e chruittid, s. his hump-backedness. C  
cryss, s. f. belt, tape, inkle, girdle. 
yn chryss, <v.> [s.] the girdle, belt, inkle, 
&c. C  
yn chryss-soillee, s. the swaddling cloth C 
cryss, v. gird, tie or bind with a belt, tape, 
&c.; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
chryss, v. did gird or bind with belt, tape. C  
cryssey, v. girding, binding with a belt or 
girdle.  
dy chryssey, v. to gird or bind with girdle C  
cryssit, 85. bound with a belt, girdle, or 
tape.  
cubair or cubeyr, s. m. a cooper; pl. -yn.  
yn chubear, s. the cooper. C 
cubbyl, s. m. a couple, a yoke of two; a roof 
timber; pl. 76 [cubbil]. 
cuckolt, s. m. a cuckold; pl. -yn.  
cug, s. f. pap, breast milk.  
yn chug, s. the pap or breast milk. C 
cugh, s. dirt, excrements. Only used to 
children.  
cughlhin, s. m. a cone; pl. -yn.  
yn chu[gh]lin, s. the cone. C 
cughlhinagh, a. conical, in form of a cone.  
cuht, s. f. a lot; pl. -yn.  
cuhtagh, a. short, brief.  
cuill, s. f. a quill, a piece of reed.  
yn chuill, s. the quill. C 
cuillee, s. f. a back room in a house, a bed-
room or closet; pl. -yn.  
cuillagh, a. d. of a back or bedroom; as, 
dorrys ny cuillagh.  
cuilleig, s. f. a nook, an inside corner; pl. 
-yn.  
yn chuilleig, s. the inside corner, nook. C 
cuilleigagh, a. having nooks, &c.  
s’cuilleigagh, a. how full of inside corners. 
C 
s’cuilleigee, a. id., comp. and sup. C 
cuillimer, s. m. a man whose bulk rather 
deforms him, the feminine of which I 
believe to be caillin.  
cuin, adv. when, at what time.  
cuinnag, s. f. a flask or horn to hold powder 
or snuff, a snuffbox; pl. -yn.  
yn chu[i]nnag, s. the flask, horn for snuff. 
C  
cuir or cuirr*, v. invite, bid; -agh 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
quir, s. See cuir. 
101 
C 
 
chuir or chuirr*, v. did bid or invite, bade, 
invited: -agh: -in, 94. C  
cuirrey, v. inviting. 
dy chuirrey, v. to bid or invite. C 
cuirrit or cuirt, 85. bidden, invited.  
cuirrey, s. m. an invitation; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn]. 
cuirraghyn, s. pl. feasts, banquets, 
invitations. 
cuirree, a. d. of bidding or inviting. yn 
chuirreyder, s. the inviter, &c. C 
cuir or cuirr*, v. sow, shoot; as, cuir y 
n’ingagh (shooting the nets or train); -agh 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
chuir or chuirr*, v. did sow, sowed: -agh: 
-in, 94. C  
cuirrit or cuirt, 85. sown.  
correy, a. d. of shooting nets; as, traa-
correy (shooting time).  
correy, a. d. of sowing, or seed, as, arroo-
correy (seed corn).  
chorrey, a. d. of seed or sowing. C  
ben chorrey, s. a woman with child. C  
corrym, a. with child. See corm.  
correyder, s. m. a sower; pl. -yn.  
yn chorreyder, s. the sower of seed. C  
cuisle, s. f. a pipe or tube, a conduit.  
cuishlin, s. f. a vein; pl. -yn; but I have 
oftener heard it pluralized as 72 [change -in 
to -eeyn].  
yn chuishlin, s. the vein. C 
cuishlin-vooar, s. an artery.  
yn chushlin-vooar, s. the artery. C  
cuishlinagh 
s’cuslinagh, a. how full of veins. C 
s’cuslinee, a. id., comp. and sup. C 
cullee, s. f. a colour or banner; the aspect of 
the air; s. pl. the tackle, furniture, or 
apparatus to work any thing, as a mill, ship, 
boat, &c.  
yn chullee, s. the colour or aspect; the 
tackle, furniture, or apparatus to work any 
thing. C 
cullyr, s. m. colour, hue, die; pl. -yn.  
yn chullyr, s. the colour. C  
cum or cumm*, v. hold, keep, retain, sustain; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
chum or chumm, did hold or held. C  
cummal, v. holding, dwelling, inhabiting. 
cummal-magh, v. holding out, persevering.  
cummit, 85. held, stopt, formed, modelled, 
hewn; 2 Kings, xxii. 6: Da ny sieyr, as da ny 
mainshtyryn obbree, as masoonee, dy 
chionnaghey fuygh as claghyn cummit, dy 
yannoo seose yn thie. Unto carpenters, and 
builders, and masons, and to buy timber and 
hewn stone to repair the house. 
s’cummit, a. how held, how formed. C 
aa-chummit, pt. formed anew. 
cummal, s. m. a dwelling, a holding; pl. 
-yn.  
yn chummal, s. the holding or dwelling C 
cummaltagh, s. m. a dweller, holder, or 
inhabitant; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
yn chummaltag[h], s. the inhabitant. C 
cummaltit 
neu-chummaltit, pt. uninhabited. 
cummey, s. m. form, shape, model, 
appearance. 
yn chummey, s. the form. C  
cummee, a. d. of holding, of form or shape.  
cummey, v. conforming, forming, 
modelling.  
cummeyder, s. m. a former, a holder.  
yn chummeyder, s. the man that forms. C  
cumfurt, s. f. the herb comfrey.  
cumir, a. close, concise, tidy, compact.  
feer chumir, <v.> very compact, tidy, &c. 
C 
cumr or cumree, v. hinder, deter, delay; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
chumr* or chumree, v. did hinder, 
hindered, deterred; -agh; -in; -ins; -it, 94. C 
cumrail, v. hindering, deterring. 
dy chumrail, v. to hinder or deter. C  
cumrit, 85. hindered, deterred.  
cumrail, s. f. a hindrance, a stop or 
stoppage; pl. -yn. Prov. “Myr smoo siyr 
smoo cumrail.” [More haste, more 
hindrance. MWW] 
cumrailagh, a. hindersome; s. m. a 
102 
C 
 
hinderer; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
s’cumrailagh, a. how hindersome. C 
s’cumrailee, a. id., comp. and sup. C 
feer chumrailagh, a. very hindersome. C  
cumraileyder 
yn chumraileyder, s. one that hinders 
another. C  
cumraag, s. m. f. comrade, companion, 
crony; pl. -yn.  
cumraagys, s. m. companionship, 
familiarity, intimacy.  
cur, v. give, put, send; with lesh after it, it is 
bring, gives, giveth, &c.; puts, putteth, &c.; 
sends, sendeth, &c.  
chur, v. did give, gave, did put, did send. C  
hug, v. put, gave, sent; hug eh (he put, he 
sent, he gave), 
currit, 85. given, put, sent, &c.  
s’currit, a. how given, put or sent. C 
ver or verr*, v. will give, put, send, bring; 
-ym; -yms. C  
der or derr* oo, v. wilt thou give; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys. For the radical of 
this irregular verb, see 62. 
cur-er-sooyl, v. averting, turning off.  
cur-haart, <s. f.> [v.] overthrow; Job, xxvi. 
12: T’eh dy rheynn yn aarkey liorish e phooar, 
as liorish e hushtey t’eh cur haart ny 
mooaralee. He divideth the sea with his power, 
and by his understanding he smiteth through 
the proud.  
cur-jee’d, v. undress, put off thee. 
cur-jee’d dty eaddagh, put off thy clothes.  
cur-lesh, v. bringing, carrying, &c.  
currit-lesh, 85. brought, carried &c.  
cur-mi-ner, in. behold. See cur-my-ner.  
cur-my-ner, in. behold, see, lo; cur-jee-my-
ner (behold ye).  
cur-ny-lieh, v. impeaching, accusing.  
dy chur-ny-lieh, v. to impeach. C 
cur-rish, v. doing, practise; Micah, ii. 1: 
Smerg dauesyn ta shêgin er mee-chairys, as 
smooinaghtyn er yn olk er nyn lhiabbaghyn! 
cha leah’s ta’n moghrey soilshaghey t’ad cur 
rish, er-yn-oyr dy vel eh ayns pooar nyn laue. 
Woe to them that devise iniquity, and work evil 
upon their beds! when the morning is light, they 
practise it, because it is in the power of their 
hand.  
cur-roo, p. having to do to or with [them]; 
-syn id. em.  
dy chur-roo, v. to have to do with [them] C  
cur-rhym, v. doing with me, having to do 
with me: -s, id. em.  
cur-rhyt, p. to do with thee, having to do 
with thee; -s, id. em.  
dy chur-shaghey, v. to adjourn. C  
currit-shaghey, 85. adjourned.  
cur-twoaie, v. beware, be aware.  
cur-volley da, giving him gladness; Jer. 
xx. 15: Dy doogh dy row da’n dooinney hug 
lesh y naight da my ayr, gra, Ta lhiannoo mac 
er ny ruggey dhyt; cur-volley da. Cursed be 
the man who brought tidings to my father, 
saying, A man child is born unto thee; making 
him very glad.  
curjeig, s. f. an alm[s] dish; no doubt from 
cur-jeirk (a dish to give alms with). This 
word [or rather, Corjeag MWW] is used for 
the surname of Cavendish (in Manks), but 
more properly giving-dish.  
yn churjeig. See curjeig. C 
curlead, s. f. a coverlid, a quilt; pl. -yn.  
yn churleid, s. the coverlid. C  
curm or currym, s. m. charge or duty; pl. 
-yn;  
curm or currym, enjoin<ed>, v. id; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
currym, s. m. duty, charge. See also curm.  
e churrym, s. his duty, his charge. C  
churm or churmee, v. did charge with 
duties. C 
curmey, v. charging to perform duties.  
curmaghey or curmal, v. enjoining 
charges or duties.  
dy churmaghey, v. to charge with duties. C  
currymaghey, v. charging, enjoining, &c, 
&c.  
dy churrymaghey, v. See churmaghey. C 
er churmal, v. hath, &c. charged, &c. C  
curmit, 85. charged with duties or 
obligations.  
curmeyder, s. m. one who charges, &c.  
curmagh, a. 
103 
C 
 
feer churmagh, a. very careful in adhering 
to the charges or duties enjoined. C  
curnaght, s. f. wheat; pl. 72 [change -aght to 
-eeyn].  
yn churnaght, s. the wheat. C  
curnee, a. d. of wheat or wheaten.  
churnee, a. d. of wheat or wheats. C  
curneein, s. f. pet, huff; pl. -yn.  
yn churneein, s. the pet or huff. C  
curneeinagh, a. pettish, huffish, easily 
turned or thrown down.  
s’curneeinagh, a. how huffish, pettish, or 
unsteady. C 
s’curneeinee, a. id., comp. and sup. C 
feer churneeinagh, a. very pettish, &c. C  
curneeinys, s. f. fickleness, &c.  
curp, s. f. buttock, ham, rump; 1 Chron. xix. 
4: Shen-y-fa ghow Hanun chaghteryn Ghavid, 
as ren eh baarey ny faasaagyn jeu, as yiare eh 
ny garmadyn jeu ayns y vean kiart rish nyn 
gurpyn, as hug eh ad ersooyl. Wherefore 
Hanun took David’s servants, and shaved 
them, and cut off their garments in the midst 
hard by their buttocks, and sent them away.  
yn churp, s. the haunch. C  
currag or corrag, s. a bundle of osiers.  
yn churrag, s. See currag. C 
curragh, s. f. a bog or fen, a marshy place or 
quagmire; pl. 72 [change -agh to -eeyn].  
yn churragh, s. the bog, fen, or marsh. C  
curree, a. d. of a bog or fen, &c.  
churree, a. d. of the bog or fen. C  
curthoollaghey, v. obscuring, the air 
gathering a cloudy aspect.  
curthoollys or curthoollid, s. m. a dark 
cloudy aspect of the air.  
curtlagh, s. f. reed or reeds, cane, &c.  
yn churtlagh, s. the reed or cane. C  
cuirtlagh, s. f. reed, reeds, cane, canes.  
curtlagh-vuck, s. f. herb bur-reed.  
curtshee, s. f. a courtesy; pl. -yn.  
cushag, s. f. ragwort or ragweed. The stem or 
stalk is called dog’s standard; the herb is 
also called St. Jameswort, seagrum, 
stagger-wort, stammerwort; pl. -yn. Prov. 
“Ta airh er cushagyn ayns shen.” [There is 
gold on cushags there.] 
yn chushag, s. the ragwort or ragweed. C 
Custal or Gilchreest, s. m. Christopher.  
custey, a. cursed, accursed.  
s’c<h>ustey, a. how cursed or accursed. C 
feer chustey, a. very cursed. C  
custh or custhee, v. whip, beat with a rod; 
-agh, 77; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86, -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
chusht, v. did whip, whipped; -agh; -in; 
-ins. C 
custhit, 85. whipped, beaten with a rod.  
custhey, s. m. a whipping; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn].  
yn chushtey, s. the whipping. C 
custhee, a. d. of whipping or whippings.  
custheyder, s. m. a whipper; pl. -yn.  
yn chushteyder, s. the whipper. C  
cutid 
e chutid, s. his keenness or cunning. C  
cweshtan, s. m. a question; pl. -yn.  
104 
D 
 
D 
D, for its sound see Remarks 7 and 8. All the 
words under this letter not marked 7 [ḏ ], 
require the sound spoken of in Remark 8 
[d̪ ]; and as a radical initial and its changes 
see 45. D is an initial in words radically 
from all the vowels, and also from f, as 
explained in Remarks 60, 119, 121, 143, 
&c.; in substantives from s, to show the 
plural possessive or ownership case; and in 
t for both nouns and verbs, a few of which 
may be seen by the letters at the end of the 
lines.  
da, p. p. 8. to him, for him, him, to, for; as, 
chur mee da eh (I gave it to him); le aym da 
(I have it for him); lhig da (let him); eeck 
da Cesar (pay to Cesar); -syn, idem. It may 
not perhaps be amiss to state here that this 
word has something very singular 
belonging to it as respects the idiom of the 
English language, but which is, however, 
peculiar to the Manks. A person that would 
attempt to translate passages wherein this 
word occurs in the Manks Scriptures, 
according to the Hamiltonian or interlinary 
system, would think it superfluous in many 
instances, especially where it is placed 
before plural and feminine nouns; as in 1 
Tim. v. 9. Ny lhig da ben-treoghe ve goit; 
which, to translate literally, would run thus, 
let not him a widow be taken; and in Gen. 
chap. i. lhig da ny ushtaghyn (let him the 
waters); lhig da ny eeanlee (let him the 
fowls), &c., &c. A learner must not hesitate 
to sacrifice the idiom of his own language 
to learn that of another, but must form 
phrases altogether incorrect and foreign to 
his own language.  
dasyn, p. em. of da, which see.  
daue, p. p. to them, for them. The pl. of da. 
dauesyn, p. p. id. em.  
dhyt, p. p. to thee, for thee; -s, id. em.  
diu, p. p. for you, to you; -ish, id. em. 
diu-hene, p. p. for yourself or selves.  
dooin, p. p. (pronounced duhn) to us, for 
us; -yn, id. em. The words hooin, rooin, 
and dooin are all to us, but used differently; 
as, cur dooin nyn arran (give us our bread), 
or rather, give to us our bread.  
dou, p, p. to me, for me, em. See dooys. 
dou-hene, p. p. for myself, to myself.  
dooys, p. p. give me. The em. of dou.  
j’ee, p. p. to her; as, cur j’ee eh (give it her 
or give it to her), -ish, id. em.  
daa, a. 8. two, the dual number; adv. twice, 
doubly. This is not the word used in 
counting, but that which is always used 
with its substantive in the singular number, 
as the Manks does not make plural till 
three. See 100.  
e ghaa, s. his two; ghaa wheesh (twice as 
much). D 
gaa-yeig, a. twelve, (ten and two); pl. -yn.  
e ghaa-yeig, a. his twelve. D 
gaa-yeig-as-daeed, a. fifty-two, (twelve 
and forty).  
gaa-yeig-oo, a. twelfth.  
daa-filley or rather daa-illey, a. twofold.  
daah, v. d[y]e, singe; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
88; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
ghaah, v. dyed, did dye; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. D 
ghaah, v. singed, did singe; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. D 
daaghagh, v. would, &c. d[y]e.  
daaghey 
dy ghaaghey, v. to dye or colour. D 
nyn daaghey, v. 8. your, &c. dying, 
colouring. 
daaghee, a. d. of dying or colouring.  
daahit, 85. dyed, coloured; Ex. xxv. 5: As 
craitnyn reaghyn daahit jiarg, as craitnyn 
badjer, as fuygh-shittim. And rams’ skins dyed 
red, and badgers’ skins, and shittim wood. 
s’daait or s’daat, how dyed. 
ro ghaahit, 85. too much dyed. D 
daahjit, 85. singed, scorched.  
s’daahjit, a. how singed. D 
ro ghaahjit, 85. too much singed. D 
slaa[-]daah, v. painting. 
daahder, s. m. a dyer or one that singes. 
daah, s. 
daah-cree, s. m. heart burn.  
daaney or daney, a. bold, daring, impudent, 
presumptive, rude.  
daney, a. bold, daring. See also daaney  
s’daaney, a. how bold or daring. D 
105 
D 
 
ro ghaaney, a. too bold or daring. D 
daanys, s. f. boldness, presumption, &c.  
daayl or daill, s. m. delay, credit, time before 
payment. Prov. “Hig daill gys eeck.” 
[Credit will come to payment]; Prov. 
“Roshee daill y dorrys.” [Credit will reach 
the door.] 
e ghaill, his credit time; delay. D 
daeed, a. forty, two score or two twenties.  
dty g[h]aeed, s. thy forty, or two twenties 
D 
daeedoo, a. fortieth.  
dagh, pro. each, every one of any number 
taken separately.  
gagh, pro. each, everyone separately. This 
word seems to change from d, without an h, 
in Pro. xxiii. 32. [? The ref. belongs to 
gaghey.] 
dall, v. 
ghall, v. did dazzle or dazzled; -agh; -ee; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. D 
dallagh, v. dazzling or to dazzle, to cause 
blindness by beholding some bright object.  
dalley, v. 
dy ghalley, v. to blind or dazzle. D 
dangeyr or rather danjeyr, s. m. danger, 
hazard. See [s. v.] cleigeen.  
e ghanjeyr, s. [his] danger. D 
danjeyragh, a. dangerous, hazardous.  
s’danjeyragh, a. how dangerous. D 
s’danjeyree, a. id., comp. and sup. D 
ro ghanjayragh, a. too dangerous. D 
danjeyrid, s. m. dangerousness.  
darrag, s. f. a beam; Mat. vii. 3: As cre’n-fa 
t’ou cronnaghey yn brinneen t’ayns sooill dty 
vraarey, agh cha vel geill ayd da’n darrag 
t’ayns dty hooill hene? And why beholdest thou 
the mote that is in thy brother’s eye, but 
considerest not the beam that is in thine own 
eye? 
darrag, s. f. a fishing line made of black hair 
snooids. 
darragh, s. m. oak; a. d. oaken.  
dy gharragh, a. d. of oak, oaken. D 
darreyder, s. m. a door keeper, a porter.  
dash, s. m. a bulk or heap built up; pl. -yn.  
dauns or daunse, v. dance, dandle; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 38.  
ghauns* or ghaunse, v. did dance, danced; 
-agh; -ee; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. D 
daunsin, v. 
e ghaunsin, v. his dancing. D 
daunsit 
s’daunsit, a. how danced. D 
daunse, s. m. a dance; pl. daunseeyn. 
daunsin 
daunseyr, s. m. a dancer; pl. -yn.  
dayll, s. f. a dingle or dale, a valley.  
deaill, s. m. 7 [ḏ ]. a quantity of dry flax tied 
together before sent to the mill to be 
cleaned; pl. deayill.  
deam, v. project or jut; -agh, 77  
gheam, v. did project, projected; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. D 
deamey, v. 
dy gheamey, v. to project or jut. D 
deamit, 85. projected, jutted.  
s’deamit, a. how projected. D 
deamey, s. m. a projection; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn].  
deamee, a. d. of projection.  
deameyder, s. m. a projector, &c.  
dean, s. m. 7 [ḏ ]. a goal or mark; pl. -yn.  
deayrt, v. spill, pour; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -yms, 87; -ys,88.  
gheayrt, v. did spill or pour; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. D 
deayrtey, v. spilling, pouring; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn].  
dy gheayrtey, v. to spill or pour. D 
deayrtit, 85. spilled, poured.  
s’deayrtit, a. how spilled or poured. D 
ro gheayrtit, 85. too much spilled, &c. D 
deayrteyder, s. m. a spiller, pourer.  
debejagh, a. 7 [ḏ ]. desperate. A low word.  
s’debejagh, a. how desperate. D 
s’debejee, a. id., comp. and sup. D 
dedge, s. f. 7 [ḏ ]. something clever.  
dee or didee, s. f. 7 [ḏ ]. a plaything for a 
child.  
deherree, s. f. destruction by fire.  
106 
D 
 
deinagh, a. weary, fatigued. 
s’deinagh, a. how weary or tired. D 
s’deinee, a. id., comp. and sup. D 
deinagh(ey), v. 
dy gheinagh or gheinaghey, v. to make 
weary or tired. D 
deinys, s. f. wearisomeness, fatigue.  
e gheinys, s. his wearisomeness. D 
dell, s. f. 7 [ḏ ]. a lever; pl. -yn. 
dell, v. 7 [ḏ ]. deal; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins. 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87.  
ghell, v. did deal; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94 D 
dellal, v. 7 [ḏ ]. dealing; pl. -yn.  
dy ghellal, v. to deal. D 
dellit, 85. 7 [ḏ ]. dealed or dealt.  
delleyder, s. m. 7 [ḏ ]. a dealer; pl. -yn.  
dendeysagh, a. 8. delicate, donsy, effeminate; 
s. m. a delicate or effeminate person; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
s’dendeysagh, a. how delicate, donsy. D 
s’dendeysee, a. more and most delicate. D 
dendeysid, s. m. delicacy, effeminacy.  
derrey, [a.] other or either.  
yn derrey-leih, s. m. the one half.  
derrey, adv. till, until. 
dewil, a. cruel, barbarous, savage, severe.  
dowil, a. See dewil.  
s’dewil, a. how cruel, inhuman. D 
s’dewiley, a. more and most cruel. D 
ro ghewil, a. too cruel, too barbarous. D 
dewiley, a. pl. cruel, savage severe.  
yn dewilagh, s. m. the cruel or terrible one; 
pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]; Isa. xxix. 2[0]: 
Son ta’n dewilagh er ny choyrt mow, as yn 
oltooanagh er ny stroie, as ta ooilley t’er nyn 
arrey son olkys er ny yiarey jeh. For the terrible 
one is brought to nought, and the scorner is 
consumed, and all that watch for iniquity are cut 
off. 
dewilys, s. f. cruelty, barbarity, inhumanity, 
severity, inclemency; pl. -syn.  
e ghewilys, s. his cruelty, &c. D 
deyll ‘beetle’ 
tarroo-deyill, s. m. the bull-worm. 
deyr or deyree, v. condemn or sentence to 
punishment: -agh, 77; -ee, 80.  
gheyr, v. did condemn, condemned; -agh; 
-ee; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. D 
deyrey, v. condemning. 
er gheyrey, v. hath, &c. condemned or 
sentenced to punishment. D 
deyrit, 85. condemned, sentenced.  
s’deyrit, a. how condemned or sentenced. 
D 
ro gheyrit, 85. too much condemned. D 
deyrey, s. m. condemnation, b[la]me, guilt. 
deyree, a. d. of condemnation.  
deyreyder, s. m. a condemner, a sentencer; 
pl. -yn.  
deyr, a. dear, not cheap.  
s’deyr, a. how dear. D 
s’deyrey, a. dearer, dearest. D 
ro gheyr, a. too dear. D 
deyrey, a. pl. dear, not cheap. 
deyrsnys, s. dearness, high price.  
dheyr, s. m. bulling; a cow is said to be so 
when she wants the bull.  
dhiane, s. m. a worm, earthworm; pl. -yn.  
dhianeagh, a. wormy, full of worms.  
dhoan or dhone, a. dark brown, bay.  
s’dhoan or s’dhone, a. how brown. D  
s’dhoaney, a. browner, brownest. D 
ro ghoan, a. too brown. D  
dhoaney, a. pl. brown, &c.  
ghoaney, a. pl. brown. D  
dhoanaghey, v. making brown or dark  
dy ghoanaghey, v. to make brown. D  
dhoanid, s. m. brownness,  
e ghoanid, s. his brownness. D  
dhonnag, s. f. a name for a brown cow.  
e ghonnag, s. his brown cow. D 
doyn, or dhoan, which see. The former 
spelling, is in Zech. vi. 3, for bay: As ayns y 
trass ainagh va cabbil bane, as ayns y chiarroo 
ainagh va cabbil glass as doyn. And in the third 
chariot white horses; and in the fourth chariot 
grisled and bay horses.  
dholtanagh, a. doltish.  
s’dholtanagh, a. how doltish. D 
s’dholtanee, a. id., comp. and sup. D 
dhon[n]ey, a. pl. ill, in a bad state of health. 
[cf. doaghan] 
s’dhonney, a. how ill or donsy. D 
dhonnan, s. m. one that is ill or poorly to 
107 
D 
 
do a thing; a dunce, dolt or dastard. [pl. 
-yn. Psalm xxxv. 15: Agh ayns my arkys 
ghow ad boggey as haggil ad cooidjagh: dy 
jarroo, haink ny eer ghonnanyn cooidjagh m’oï 
nagh bione dou, jannoo craid jee’m, as cha 
scuirr ad. But in mine adversity they rejoiced, 
and gathered themselves together: yea, the 
very abjects came together against me 
unawares, making mouths at me, and ceased 
not. 
e ghonnan, s. his dunce or dastard. D  
dhonnanagh, a. duncely, dastardly.  
s’dhonnanagh, a. how dastardly. D 
s’dhonnanee, a. id., comp. and sup. D 
ro ghonnanagh, adv. too duncely or 
abjectly; <Psalm xxxv. 15.> [Ref. belongs 
above, s. v. dhonnan]. D  
dhonk, s. m. a heavy blow or thump; pl. -yn.  
dhonkan, s. m. a bruiser in a flax mill, a 
thumper to beat a pavement; pl. -yn.  
e ghonkan, 8. his thumper. D  
dhonk, v.  
ghonk, v. did thump; -agh; -ee; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. D  
dhonkey, v. thumping.  
dy ghonkey or ghonkal, v. to thump. D  
donkit 
ro ghonkit, 85. too thumped. D  
dhonkeyder, s. m. one who thumps; pl. 
-yn.  
dhooraght, s. m. a perquisite, something 
given over the settled price or wages.  
dooraght, s. See dhooraght.  
e ghooraght, s. his perquisite; pl. -yn. D  
dhornane, s. f. a handle, a helve or hilt, a 
short handle as that of a knife, &c.; pl. -yn  
e ghornane, s. his handle, D  
dhornanagh, a. having short handles, as a 
two handled knife; skynn dhornanagh.  
dorneein, s. m. See dhornane.  
dhotail, v. [be] doting, impaired in the 
understanding by age or otherwise.  
dhubbey, s. m. a puddle, a pool; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn].  
dhull, s. m. a quantity of thread or yarn 
wound on a ball; a plug or stopple; pl. -yn.  
dhussan, s. m. a dozen; pl. -yn.  
e ghussan, s. his dozen; pl. -yn. D  
dirk, s. f. a dagger, a dart.  
dirrag, s. f. a wicket door, a small door or 
gutter for sheep to pass on; pl. -yn.  
Divlyn, s. m. 7 [ḏ ]. Dublin.  
goll dy Ghivlyn, s. going to Dublin. D  
doagh, s. f. a vat, a keeve, a press.  
e ghoagh, s. his vat, or keeve. D  
doaie, s. f. decency, suitableness, worth.  
e ghoaie, s. his decency, &c. D  
doaieagh or doaiagh, a. decent, becoming, 
suitable, discreet, worthy.  
s’doaiagh, a. how decent or genteel, comp. 
and sup. D 
dy doaieagh, adv. decently, suitably, 
discreetly, worthily.  
ro ghoaiagh, a. too decent, &c. D  
neu-ghoaiagh, a. untidy, slovenly, uncivil, 
imprudent. 
doal, a. blind, without sight, dark.  
ny doail, s. pl. the blind. Isa. xxxv. 5: Eisht 
hee sooillyn ny doail er ny osley, as nee 
cleayshyn ny beuyr clashtyn dy byrragh. Then 
the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the 
ears of the deaf shall be unstopped.  
s’doal, a. how blind. D 
s’doaley, a. blinder, blindest. D 
ro ghoal, a. too blind. D  
doaley, a. pl. blind, sightless.  
ben-ghoal, s. f. a blind woman. 
ghoaley, a. pl. blind; as, mraane ghoaley. 
D  
doallan 
farkan-doallan, s. m. blindman’s buff. 
dollagh 
gorley-ghollagh, s. a disease causing 
blindness, or dimness of sight. 
doll, v. blot, deface, erase; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86.  
gholl, v. did blot, or blind; -agh; -ee; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. D  
dolley, v. blotting, defacing, &c.  
dy ghoalley, v. to blind, to blot; Exod. 
xxxii. 32: …as mannagh jean oo, lhig dooys, 
ta mee guee ort, ve er my ghoalley ass dty 
lioar t’ou er scrieu. …and if not, blot me, I pray 
thee, out of thy book which thou hast written. D  
dollit, 85. blotted, defaced, erased.  
s’dollit, a. how blotted or blinded. D 
108 
D 
 
s’dhollit, a. how blotted, or defaced. D 
ro ghollit, 85. too blotted or effaced. D  
dellid, s. m. 8. failure of sight, blindness.  
e ghellid, s. his dimness. D 
doaltattym, a. sudden, unexpected, hasty, 
without knowledge before hand. 
s’doaltattym, a. how sudden or unawares. 
D 
ro ghoaltattym, a. too sudden. D  
doaltattymagh or dy doaltattym, adv. 
suddenly.  
s’doaltattymagh, a. how suddenly. D 
s’doaltattymee, a. id., comp. and sup. D 
ro ghoaltattymagh, adv. too suddenly. D  
doaltattymid, s. m. 90. suddenness.  
doarlish, s. f. a gap, or breach; pl. -yn.  
e ghoarlish, s. his gap; pl. -yn. D  
keeil doarlish, s. side of the gap. 
doarlishagh, a. having gaps or breaches.  
doarn, s. f. a fist.  
e ghoarn, s. his fist. D  
duirn, s. pl. fists, the hands shut or 
clenched; the pl. of doarn.  
e ghuirn, s. his fists. D  
lane-doarn, s. f. a handful. 
lane-duirn or laneyn-duirn, s. pl. 
handfuls, fistfuls. 
doarn mhuinneel, s. f. a cuff.  
dornaig, s. f. a covering for the hand or 
fist, used to guard the hand against thorns.  
doarnaig, s. f. See dornaig. 
dobberan, v. 7 [ḏ ]. lamenting, mourning, 
bewailing, &c.; s. f. lamentation, mourning. 
dty ghobberan, s. thy lamentation. D  
dobberanagh or dobbranagh, a. 7 [ḏ ]. 
sorrowful; Job vi. 7: Ny reddyn shoh ta my 
annym dy yiooldey; t’ad myr my veaghey 
dobberanagh. The things that my soul refused 
to touch are as my sorrowful meat.; s. m. 7 [ḏ ]. 
a mourner.  
e ghobberanagh, s. his lamenter; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. D  
doccar, s. f. dint or stress of labour.  
e ghoccar, s. his dint, or stress of labour. D  
doccar-coraa, s. m. emphasis.  
 doccar-coraaagh, a. emphatic.  
doccaragh, a. laborious, done with great 
dint or exertion of strength.  
s’doccarragh, a. how laborious, with how 
much dint or stress of labour. D 
s’doccarree, a. id., comp. and sup.; 1 Cor. 
xv. 10: …agh ren mee laboragh ny 
s’doccarree na ad ooilley: ny-yeih cha nee 
mish, agh grayse Yee va mârym. …but I 
laboured more abundantly than they all: yet not 
I, but the grace of God which was with me. D 
ro ghoccaragh, a. too laborious. D  
doccarid, s. m. laboriousness.  
e ghoccarid, s. his laboriousness. D  
doghan, s. m. disorder, distemper; pl. -yn.  
e ghoghan, s. his disease, or disorder. D  
doghaney, v. disordering, &c.  
dy ghoghaney, v. to cause disease, or 
disorder. D  
doghanagh, a. disordered, ill, &c.; s. m. a 
disordered, diseased, or sick person; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
s’doghanagh, a. how disorde[re]d. D 
s’doghanee, a. id., comp. and sup. D 
ro ghoghanagh or ghoghanit, a. too 
disordered, or diseased. D  
doillee, a. difficult, not easy.  
s’doillee, a. how difficult, comp. and sup. 
D 
by-ghoillee, adv. because of difficulty or 
hardness; Ex. xiii. 15: As haink eh gy-kione, 
tra dy by-ghoillee lesh Pharaoh yn raad y 
lhiggey dooin, dy ren y Chiarn stroie ooilley’n 
chied er ny ruggey ayns cheer Egypt, 
chammah yn chied er ny ruggey jeh dooinney 
as baagh: And it came to pass, when Pharaoh 
would hardly let us go, that the Lord slew all the 
firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the firstborn 
of man, and the firstborn of beast.  
ro ghoillee, a. too difficult. D  
dy doillee, adv. [with] difficulty, not easily.  
doilleeid, s. m. difficulty, hardship.  
e ghoilleeid, s. his difficulty. D  
dollan 
e ghollan, s. [his] fan or winnowing 
instrument. D  
dolley, s. lack; Exod. xvi. 18: As tra howse ad 
eh lesh omer, cha row veg harrish echeysyn 
ren mooarane y haglym, as ersyn haggil cooid 
y veggan, cha row dolley. And when they did 
mete it with an omer, he that gathered much 
had nothing over, and he that gathered little 
109 
D 
 
had no lack.  
dhulley, s. m. scarcity, scantiness. Seldom 
used but negatively; as, cha row dhulley. 
<T>.  
dolt, s. m. a ward; pl. -aghyn [? pl. of doltey].  
doltanys, s. m. adoption.  
doltey, s. m. an adopted child, or a child 
one has stood sponcer for at baptism.  
e gholtey, s. his godson. D  
doo, a. black, dark. 
s’doo, a. how black. Prov. “Myr s’doo yn 
feeagh yiow eh sheshey.” [As black as the 
raven is, he’ll find a mate.] D 
s’dooey, a. blacker, blackest. D 
ro ghoo, a. too black D  
dooey, a. pl. black, dark.  
ghooey, a. pl. black. D  
doo, v. blacken, darken; -agh. 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83.  
ghoo, v. [did] blacken; -agh; -in; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. D  
doo[g]hey, v. blackening, making black.  
dy ghooghey, v. to blacken. D  
dy ghooaghey or ghooghey, v. to blacken. 
D  
dooit, 85. blackened, &c.  
ro ghooit, 85. too blackened. D  
dooid, s. m. blackness, darkness.  
e ghooid, s. his blackness. D  
doo-gheurey, s. m. the dead of winter.  
doo-gorrym, a. purple.  
doo-gorrymid, s. m. purpleness.  
doo[-]oalee, s. f. a spider; pl. -yn.  
boghan-dho, s. f. the herb burdock. [See 
bossan-dhoa.] 
bossan dhoa, or bog[h]an[-]dho, s. m. 
clotbur, burdock, or coppy-major. 
drine doo (the sloe thorn). 
gaaue-doo, s. m. a blacksmith. 
gob doo, s. m. a muscle [sc. mussel]. 
dhooag, s. f. an eclipse: a general name for 
a black cow.  
e ghooag, s. his eclipse; pl. -yn. D  
dool, a, blackish.  
dooan, s. a hook, a fish hook; pl. -yn. The 
etymology of this word no doubt is doo 
(dark), and the diminutive [-]an, (the little 
thing that lies hid in darkness to deceive).  
e ghooan, s. his hook; pl. -yn. D  
dooan-y-chione-cast, s. f. the herb self-
heal. 
dooanagh 
ro ghooanagh, a. too hooked. D  
dooble, a. double; p[l]. -y[n].  
doobl*, v. 
ghoobl or ghooble, v. did double; -agh; 
-ee; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. D  
dy ghoobley, v. to double. D  
doobl[i]t, 85. doubled.  
ro ghooblit, 85. too doubled. D  
doodee, s. f. a damsel, a wench. Only used on 
the South of the island.  
vuddee, s. f. damsel, wench; the voc. of 
doodee. 
e ghoodee, s. his damsel or wench. D  
doogh, a. ill, bad, dire.  
s’doogh, a. how ill, bad; Mat. xii. 45: Eisht 
t’eh goll, as cur lesh mârish shiaght spyrrydyn 
elley ta ny smessey na eh hene, as t’ad goll 
shagh as cummal ayns shen: as ta stayd 
yerrinagh yn dooinney shen ny s’doogh na’n 
toshiaght. Then goeth he, and taketh with 
himself seven other spirits more wicked than 
himself, and they enter in and dwell there: and 
the last state of that man is worse than the first; 
worse, worst. D 
dooghey, a. pl. bad, ill, dire.  
dy doogh, adv. badly, not well.  
ro ghoogh, a. too bad, too ill. D  
dooghys, s. f. nature, quality, kind, temper.  
e ghooghys, s. his nature. D  
dooghyssagh, a. natural, temporal, opposed 
to spiritual, inbred, according to nature.  
s’dooghyssagh, a. how natural or 
congenial, with what natural instinct. D 
ro ghooghyssagh, a. too natural. D  
neu-ghoo[g]hysagh, a. unnatural, 
disaffectionate. 
dooie a. kind, beneficent, good natured, true.  
s’dooie, a. how kind or affectionate, comp. 
and sup. D 
ro ghooie, a. too kind. 
boayl e ghooie (his native place). D  
neu-ghooie, a. unkindly; barren; 2 Kings, 
ii. 19: Cur-my-ner, ta shin guee ort, ta’n ard-
valley shoh soit er boayl aalin, myr ta my hiarn 
fakin: agh ta’n ushtey neu-follan, as ta’n thalloo 
110 
D 
 
neu-ghooie. Behold, I pray thee, the situation 
of this city is pleasant, as my lord seeth: but the 
water is naught, and the ground barren. 
dooin, v. i. close up, shut up or darken; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins; 84.  
doon, v. shut, close up, darken, &c.; -agh, 
77.  
ghooin, v. did close, shut, or darken; -agh; 
-ee; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. D  
dooney, v. shutting, closing, darkening.  
dooiney, v. shutting, dosing or darkening.  
dy ghooney, v. to shut or close up. D  
dooint, 85. shut, closed, darkened.  
s’dooint, a. how closed or shut. D 
ro ghooinnit or ghooint, 85. too closed or 
shut. D  
dunt, a. shut or darkened, a corruption of 
dooint; as, dorrys dunt (the shut or back 
door).  
dorrys-doont or -dunt, s. the back or shut 
door. 
dooineyder, s. m. a shutter, a darkener.  
dooneyder, s. m. a closer. See dooneyder 
(sic).  
dooinney, s. m. a man; pl. see deiney.  
O ghooinney, s. Oh man! voc. case. D  
dooinney-aeg, s. m. a young man.  
dooinney-çheerey, s. m. a countryman.  
dooinney-moyllee, s. m. an applauder, a 
praiser.  
dooinney-poosee, a bridegroom.  
dooinney-poost, s. m. a married man, a 
husband. 
dooinney-seyr, s. m. a gentleman.  
dooinney-sooree, s. m. a wooer, a courter.  
deiney, s. m. pl. men; the pl. of dooinney.  
e gheiney, s. his men. D 
ard-ghooinney, s. m. a great man. 
cloan-gheiney, s. pl. children of men. 
Doolish 
Awin Ghoolish, s. Douglas river. D  
doon, s. a field called in English a close. 
Doonaght, s. m. Sabbath, the Lord’s Day, 
Sunday. Perhaps from doon (shut or close 
up). and aght (way); as doors and gates 
were all to be in a closed up state on this 
day.  
e Ghoonaght, s. his Sunday. D  
ro Ghoonaghtagh, a. too much on Sundays 
or Lord’s days. D  
Doonee, a. d. of the Sabbath, Sabbatic.  
oie Ghoonee, s. the night preceding the 
Sabbath or Sunday. Why it is so called is 
not known. Oie Jedoonee is Sunday night. 
D  
doosht* or dooshtey, v. awaken, arouse; 
-agh. 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84.  
dooisht, v. awake, awaken, awakened; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84.  
ghooisht, v. did awaken; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -ys, 94. D  
dy ghoostey, v. to awaken. D  
dooishtit, 85. awakened.  
s’dooishtit, a. how awakened, comp. and 
sup. D 
ro ghooishtit, 85. too awakened. D  
dooshtey, s. a wake, a vigil; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn].  
dooisht, a. ‘awake’ 
s’dooisht, a. how much awake, how 
vigilant. D  
dooishtey, a. pl. watchful, vigilant.  
dooishtagh, a. watchful, vigilant.  
dooishteyder, s. m. an awakener.  
doour, s. f. a dam, a collection of water, a 
reservoir.  
dooyt, s. m. a doubt; pl. -yn. 
e ghooyt, s. his doubt. D  
gyn-dooyt, adv. without doubt. 
dooyt, v. id; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84.  
ghooyt, v. did doubt; -agh; -in; -ym; -ys, 
94. D  
dooyteil, v. doubting, distrusting.  
dy ghooyteil, v. to doubt. D  
dooytit, 85. doubted.  
neu-ghooytit, a. undoubted. 
dooyteilagh, a. doubtful; s. m. a doubtful 
or doubting person; pl. 71 [change -agh to 
-ee].  
ro ghooyteilagh, a. too doubtful. D  
dooytylagh, s. m. a doubter; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee].  
dooyteilys, s. m. doubtfulness.  
doral, s. f. a pore, puncture, or aperture.  
111 
D 
 
dorraghey, a. dark, duskish.  
s’dorraghey, a. how dark. D 
s’dorree, a. darker, darkest. D 
dy dorraghey, adv. darkly.  
ro ghorraghey, a. too dark D  
con-ghorraghey, a. something dark. 
Perhaps this word is from çhionn and 
dorraghey (hardly dark). 
coraa-dorraghey, s. m. a parable or dark 
saying; pl. coraaghyn-dorraghey. 
raa-dorraghey, s. m. dark saying, a riddle; 
Jud. xiv. 12 and 15: Ver-yms magh raa-
dorraghey: my oddys shiu dy jarroo bun y 
choyrt dou er cheu-sthie jeh shiaght laa yn 
vannish, as feddyn magh eh, eisht ver-yms diu 
jeih brelleenyn as feed, as jeih caghlaaghyn as 
feed dy gharmadyn; I will now put forth a riddle 
unto you: if ye can certainly declare it me within 
the seven days of the feast, and find it out, then 
I will give you thirty sheets and thirty change of 
garments:  
As haink eh gy-kione er y chiaghtoo laa, dy 
dooyrt ad rish ben Samson, Jean dty heshey y 
chleayney, dy vod eh ginsh dooin yn raa-
dorraghey, er-nonney nee mayd uss as thie 
dty ayrey y lostey lesh aile: And it came to pass 
on the seventh day, that they said unto 
Samson’s wife, Entice thy husband, that he 
may declare unto us the riddle, lest we burn 
thee and thy father’s house with fire. 
dorraghys or dorrid, s. m. 93. darkness; 
pl. -yn.  
dy ghorraghys or ghorrid, s. of darkness. 
D  
con-ghorraghys or con-ghorrid, s. m. 
darkness, not altogether dark, pretty dark. 
dorrin, s. m. tempest, storm; pl. -yn.  
dy ghorrin, s. of tempest. D  
dorrinagh, a. tempestuous, stormy.  
s’dorrinagh, a. how tempestuous. D 
s’dorrinee, a. id., comp. and sup. D 
ro ghorrinagh, a. too tempestuous. D  
dorrys, s. m. a door; pl. -syn.  
e ghorrys, s. his door; pl. -syn. D  
dorrysh, a. d. of a door or doors.  
keeil dorrysh, s. side of the door or door 
side. 
dorrys-doont or -dunt, s. the back or shut 
door.  
fo-dorrys, s. m. the sole of the door. 
sole y dorrys, s. the threshold of the door; 
Zeph. i. 9: Ayns y laa cheddin neem’s 
kerraghey adsyn ooilley ta lheim harrish sole y 
dorrys, ta lhieeney thie nyn mainshtyr lesh 
meechairys as molteyrys. In the same day also 
will I punish all those that leap on the threshold, 
which fill their masters’ houses with violence 
and deceit. 
doss, s. m. a bunch, a cluster, a bow of riband.  
e ghoss, s. his cluster. D  
dossagh, a. clustery, bushy, bunchy. 
dossan, s. m. a small bunch; 1 Sam. xxv. 
18: Eisht ren Abigail siyr, as ghow ee daa 
cheead bwilleen? as daa haagh feeyney, as 
queig kirree aarlit, as queig towseyn dy arroo 
greddanit, as keead dossan dy raisinyn, as 
daa cheead baskad dy figgyn, as hug ee ad er 
assylyn. Then Abigail made haste, and took 
two hundred loaves, and two bottles of wine, 
and five sheep ready dressed, and five 
measures of parched corn, and an hundred 
clusters of raisins, and two hundred cakes of 
figs, and laid them on asses.  
e ghossan, s. his small cluster or bunch. D  
dossanagh, a. bunchy, clusterous; the dim. 
of dossagh  
ro ghossanagh, a. too bunchy. D  
dourin, s. m. a distemper, a malady.  
e ghourin, s. his distemper. D  
dourinagh, a. distemperous, contagious.  
s’dourinagh, a. how distempered. D 
s’dourinee, a. id., comp. and sup. D 
ro ghourinagh, a. too contagious. D  
dow, s. m. an ox, a bullock; pl. see dew. Prov. 
“Cha stamp rieau yn dow doo er e chass.” 
[The black ox never trod on his foot.] 
e ghow, s. his ox or bullock. D  
dew, s. pl. oxen, bullocks.  
dy ghew, s. of oxen; of bullocks. D 
dowanee or dowaney, s. m. dawning of the 
day.  
dowin, a. deep, entering far.  
dowiney, a. pl. deep, not superficial.  
ro ghowin, a. too deep. D  
s’dowin, a. how deep. D 
co-dowin, a. as deep, equal in partnership. 
s’diuney, a. deeper, deepest, the comp. and 
112 
D 
 
sup. of dowin. 
diun, v. deepen; -agh, 77; -ee, 80.  
ghiun, v. did deepen; -agh; -ee; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. D  
diunaghey, v. deepening, &c.  
diunid, s. m. depth; pl. -yn.  
e ghiunld, s. his depth. D  
drabag, s. f. a dirty woman, a slut; pl. -yn.  
drane, s. f. rhyme, metre, poetry, verse.  
drap or drapp*, v. climb; -agh, 77.  
drappal, v. climbing; 1 Sam. xiv. 13: As ren 
Jonathan drappal seose er e laueyn as er e 
chassyn, as e armyder ny yeï. And Jonathan 
climbed up upon his hands and upon his feet, 
and his armourbearer after him. Jer, iv. 29: 
…hed ad stiagh ayns ny thammagyn, as 
drappal seose er ny creggyn: bee dy chooilley 
ard-valley treigit, as cha bee dooinney cummal 
ayndoo. …they shall go into thickets, and climb 
up upon the rocks: every city shall be forsaken, 
and not a man dwell therein.  
drappit, 85. climbed up.  
dreamal, v. 
e ghreamal, v. his dreaming. D  
drease or dreast*, adv. after a while, after a 
short time to rest or ease; -agh, id. em.  
e ghreast, s. his while. See drease. D  
dree, a. tedious, slow. 
s’dree, a. how slow or tedious, slower, 
slowest D 
ro ghree, s. too tedious or slow. D  
dreem or dreeym, s. m. back; pl. -inyn; or 
-yn.  
e ghreeym, s. his back; pl. -yn. <G> [D] 
drommey, a. d. of or belonging to the 
back; gour nyn drommey (backwards); 
John, xviii. <1>6: Cha leah eisht as v’eh er 
ghra roo, Mish eh, hie ad gour nyn drommey, 
as huitt ad gys y thalloo. As soon then as he 
had said unto them, I am he, they went 
backward, and fell to the ground.  
dromag or dromagh, s. m. a backband, a 
band over a horse’s back.  
dreih, s. m. a wretch, miserable or forlorn 
creature.  
dreighyn, s. pl. wretches, slaves.  
y g[h]reih, s. the wretch.  
e ghreih, s. his wretch, slave, or drudge. D  
ro ghreihagh, a. too wretched. D  
drein or drean, s. m. a wren; pl. -yn.  
e ghrein, s. his wren; pl. -yn. D  
drein[-]mollagh, s. m. the bird tomtit.  
dress, s. f. a bramble, a briar; pl. -yn.  
e ghress, s. his briar; pl. -yn. D  
dressee, a. d. of briar or briars.  
dressagh, a. briary, having briars.  
s’dressagh, a. how briary. D 
s’dressee, a. more briary, most briary. D 
ro ghressagh, a. too briary. D  
driagh or driaght, s. a chain of links; pl. -yn. 
e ghriaght, s. his chain; pl. -yn. D 
driaght, v. chain; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
driaghtey, v. chaining, binding with a 
chain.  
driaghtit, 85. chained, fettered.  
s’driaghtit, a. how chained. D 
driaghteyder, s. m. a chainer; pl. -yn.  
drid, s. m. a slow trot;  
drid, v. trot slow; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
dridal, v. trotting slow.  
dridlagh, s. m. thin slop, drippings.  
drigagh, a. under enchantment.  
drigagh, a. watery, dropping water.  
drigey, v. dropping, falling in drops.  
drillin, s. m. a small particle of fire; pl. -yn, 
or drilleeyn.  
drine, s. m. thorn, thorn tree, quickset; pl. 
-yn. Of these there are several; as,  
drine doo or arn (the sloe thorn). 
drine bugogue (the buck thorn). 
drine drughaig (the hip thorn). 
drine skeag (the haw thorn), &c.  
e ghrine, s. his thorn tree; pl. -yn. D  
drineagh, a. thorny, prickly, full of thorn 
trees or quicksets.  
s’drineagh, a. how thorny. D 
s’drinee, a. more thorny, most thorny. D 
ro ghrineagh, s. too thorny. D 
drogh, an adjunctive, a. mal<e>[-], mis[-], 
evil, base, ill, bad. Prov. Daa ghrogh eeck 
t’ayn: geeck rolaue, as dyn geeck edyr. 
[There are two bad pays: paying 
113 
D 
 
beforehand, and not paying at all.]  
drogh-aghtys, s. f. ill behaviour, 
misdemeanor.  
drogh-chorrym, s. f. foul play, evil 
treatment; Acts, vii. 19: Ghell eh shoh dy 
foalsey rish y chynney ain, as hug eh drogh-
chorrym da nyn ayraghyn, myr shen dy row ad 
êginit nyn gloan veggey y hilgey magh, dy ve 
stroit. The same dealt subtilly with our kindred, 
and evil entreated our fathers, so that they cast 
out their young children, to the end they might 
not live.  
yn drogh-er, s. m. the evil one, masculine.  
drogh-ghoo, s. m. ill fame, reproach, 
scandal, disgrace, discredit.  
drogh-haghyrt, s. m. a disaster, an ill hap.  
drogh-harrooghys, s. m. ill thrift; Eccl. v. 
14: Agh ta’n verchys cheddin cherraghtyn 
liorish drogh-harrooghys; as t’eh geddyn mac 
as cha vel nhee erbee ny laue. But those riches 
perish by evil travail: and he begetteth a son, 
and there is nothing in his hand.  
drogh-hurn, s. m. an ill turn or job.  
drogh-yannoo or yantys, s. m. evil doings.  
e ghrogh-yannoo, s. his evil, bad, or ill 
doings; D  
drogh-yantagh, s. m. an evil doer, a sinner.  
droghad, s. f. a bridge; pl. -yn. Prov. “Moyll 
y droghad myr heu harrish.” [Praise the 
bridge as you go over it.] 
drollane (sic: stress), s. m. a drone, a drudge, 
an inactive spiritless creature; and in fond 
or endearing language, drollane boght 
means, poor dear thing.  
drollaneagh, a. dronish, drooping.  
s’drollaneagh, a. how despicable or mean. 
D 
s’drollanee, a. nearer, nearest. [? sc. 
‘dearer, dearest’] D 
drolloo, s. m. pot hooks, pot hangers.  
e ghrolloo, s. his pot-hooks or hangers. D  
drone or droyn, s. m. a hump or rising part 
on any thing.  
dronney, a. d. of the hump or rising part.  
dronnagh, a. having a hump or rising part.  
s’dronnagh, a. how humpish. D 
s’dronnee, a. id., comp. and sup. D 
dronnan, s. m. a small bump.  
dronnid, s. m. humpishness.  
drow, s. grains, the malt after the beer is 
extracted.  
druaight, s. m. a Druid.  
fo ghr[uai]ght, s. under druidism or 
inchantment. D  
druaightagh, a. Druidic. That this word is 
also the substantive, appears from the 
plural being in Jer. xxvii. 9; s. m. a Druid: 
Shen-y-fa ny cur-jee geill da ny phadeyryn eu, 
ny da ny fallogyssee, ny da ny ashleyderyn, ny 
da ny druaiaghtee, ny da ny fir-obbee eu, ta 
loayrt riu, gra, Cha jean shiu shirveish ree 
Vabylon. Therefore hearken not ye to your 
prophets, nor to your diviners, nor to your 
dreamers, nor to your enchanters, nor to your 
sorcerers, which speak unto you, saying, Ye 
shall not serve the king of Babylon; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
druaightys or drualtys, s. m. Druidism, 
enchantment. 
driualtys, s. Druidism [l. druailtys ?].  
drug, s. f. a dray; pl. -yn.  
drughaig (sic: stress), s. f. the hip thorn, the 
hip thorn berry.  
drine drughaig (the hip thorn). 
drughaigagh, a. hippy, full of hips.  
s’drug[h]aigagh (sic: stress), a. how hippy 
or full of hips. D 
s’drug[h]aigee, a. id., comp. and sup. D 
druight 
yn ghruight, s. the measles.   
druight, s. m. dew; pl. -yn.  
dy ghruight, s. of dew. D  
lus y druight, s. f. sun-dew. 
druightoil or druightoilagh, a. dewy.  
s’druightoilagh, a. how dewy. D 
s’druightoilee, a. more dewy, most dewy. 
D 
ro ghruightoil or ghruightoilagh, a. too 
dewy. D  
drundin, s. m. lees, dregs, leys.  
e ghrundin, s. his lees or dregs. D  
drunt, s. f. the gum; pl. -yn.  
e ghrunt, s. his gum; pl. -yn. D  
dty, pro. thy, thee, of thee, belonging to thee. 
It is also used for a, as in Gen. iv. 12: Tra 
t’ou laboragh y thalloo, cha jean ee, maghey 
114 
D 
 
shoh, gymmyrkey dhyt’s e niart; dty yoarree, as 
dty wagaantagh vees oo er yn ooir.  
When thou tillest the ground, it shall not 
henceforth yield unto thee her strength; a 
fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the 
earth.  
dt’, pro. thy, thee; an abbreviation of dty 
when followed by words beginning with a 
vowel as dt’ eddin (thy face); dt’ oi (against 
thee); dt’ egooish (without thee); dt’ oays 
hene (thy own good or goodness); Job, v. 
[27]: Cur-my-ner shoh, ta shin er gheddyn 
magh eh, shen myr te; eaisht rish, as gow 
toiggal jeh son dt’ oays hene. Lo this, we have 
searched it, so it is; hear it, and know thou it for 
thy good.  
duillag, s. f. a leaf; pl. -yn.  
e ghuillag, s. his leaf; pl. -yn. D  
duillag argid, s. f. silver weed, tansy.  
duillag villish, s. f. costmary, alcost.  
duillag pharick, s. f. plantain.  
far-ghuillag, s. f. an artificial leaf. 
duillagagh or duillagh, a. leafy.  
s’duillagagh, a. how leafy. D 
s’duillagee, a. more leafy, most leafy. D 
dulgyrnee or doalgaanhee, s. f. impairment 
of the sight so as to see everything in two. 
It is generally understood to mean 
conjuration, or an affection of fascination 
of the sight; the latter spelling seems to me 
the best, as it shews its meaning to be a 
degree of blindness, seeing things double.  
dullish, s. f. a marine eatable leaf, dillisk.  
[dullish] far, a. fresh; as, dullish-far-ushtey 
(fresh water dillise). [Neither dillisk nor 
dillise is in the OED.] 
dullyr, s. f. dimness, a dark hue, lowering; 
Mat. xvi. 3: As ayns y voghrey, Bee emshyr 
vroghe ayn jiu; son ta’n aer jiarg as dullyr. And 
in the morning, It will be foul weather to day: for 
the sky is red and lowering.  
dunnal, a. courageous, valiant, intrepid.  
s’dunnal, a. how courageous, brave, 
daring, or intrepid, comp. and sup. 
ro ghunnal, a. too courageous, too daring, 
or intrepid. D  
dunnalley, a. pl. courageous, &c.  
dunnallid, s. m. courageousness, &c.  
dunnallys, s. m. courage, bravery, spirit, 
resolution, intrepidity, fortitude, boldness; 
Heb. iv. 16: Lhig dooin er-y-fa shen cheet lesh 
dunnallys gys stoyl-reeoil e ghrayse; dy vod 
mayd myghin y chosney, as grayse y gheddyn 
dy chooney lhien ayns traa feme. Let us 
therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, 
that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to 
help in time of need.  
e ghunnallys, s. his courage. D  
dunver, s. m. a murderer; pl. -yn. No doubt 
dun, from dooinney (a man), and ver from 
var (did kill or slay).  
y ghunver, s. a murderer; pl. -yn. D  
dunveragh, a. murderous.  
s’dunveragh, a. how murderous. D  
s’dunveree, a. more and most murderous. 
D 
ro ghunveragh, a. too murderous. D  
dunver-failt, s. m. a ruffian.  
dunver[-]hene, s. m. f. suicide, one who 
destroys him or herself, a felo de se.  
dunverys, s. m. murder, murderment.  
e ghunverys, s. his murder. D  
dwoaie, s. f. detestation, abhorrence, dislike.  
dy ghwoaie, s. of detestation. D  
e woaie (sic), s. his hatred or detestation. D 
er-dwooaie, a. determined to resist [i.e. 
hostile?]. 
dwoaiagh, a. detestable, hateful, abhorrent.  
s’dwoaiagh, a. how detestable, how 
hateful, with what hatred or dislike, comp. 
and sup. D 
ro ghwoaiagh, a. too detestable. D  
ro woaiagh (sic), a. too hateful or 
detestable. D 
dwoaiys or dwoaieid, [s. m.] 
detestableness, hatefulness.  
e ghwoaieys, s. his abhorrence, &c. D  
e woaiys (sic), s. his detestableness. D 
dwoaiysagh, s. m. a detestable person; the 
plural is in Pro. xxiv. 24; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee]: Eshyn jirrys rish y vee-chrauee, 
T’ou uss cairagh; ersyn hig mollaght y theay, 
dwoaiyssee ashoonyn eh. He that saith unto 
the wicked, Thou are righteous; him shall the 
people curse, nations shall abhor him. [Is not 
dwoaiysee rather a future verb here? 
MWW] 
115 
D 
 
dy, [part.] The word dy is a particle used in 
composition before adjectives, to make 
them adverbs, as nearly every adjective can 
be made an adverb by placing dy before it. 
For sake of abridging the work I have only 
inserted a few, yet the reader may 
understand how they are made, by the 
following.  
dy-aalin, adv. beautifully.  
dy-aarloo, adv. readily.  
dy-bieau, adv. quickly.  
dy-boght, adv. poorly.  
dy-cheilley, adv. together.  
dy-chooilley, adv. every.  
dy-slane, adv. wholly.  
dy-surransagh, adv. patiently, &c., &c. 
There are many adverbs in the language 
without this class.  
dy, adv. that or there. I think this word, as 
used in composition, to be adverbial; as in 
er aggle dy bee (lest that); er aggle dy 
beagh (for fear that be); or (for fear there 
be); dy row (that was); (there was); (that 
be); (be as that); 2 Sam. xviii. 32: As dooyrt 
y ree rish Cushi, Vel y dooinney aeg Absalom 
sauchey? As dreggyr Cushi, Dy row noidyn my 
hiarn y ree, as ooilley ny ta girree seose dt’oi dy 
yannoo aggair dhyt, myr ta’n dooinney aeg 
shen. And the king said unto Cushi, Is the 
young man Absalom safe? And Cushi 
answered, The enemies of my lord the king, 
and all that rise against thee to do thee hurt, be 
as that young man is.  
dy-nee, pro. that is; colloquially we say dy 
re, but in sacred or solemn discourse we 
say dy nee, the present tense of dy row.  
dy-re, that is; Methodist Hymn Book, lx. 5: 
Son ta mee eig’nit dy ghoaill-rish, / Dy re oo 
hene, sheign glenney mish; / Seose hood 
nee’m cur dy chooilley nhee: / Ta lheid yn 
obbyr feeu jeh Jee. [But I am obliged to admit 
that it is thyself that must cleanse me; I shall 
give everything up to Thee: such a task is 
worthy of God. MWW] See dy-nee.  
dy, adv. to; when placed before verbs is 
always to; as, dy aagail (to leave); dy 
aarlaghey (to cook); dy arraghey (to shift); 
&c, &c.; pronounced dhe.  
dy my varroo, v. to kill or slay me.  
dy, conj. if; dy beagh eh (if he were); dy 
raghin, or, as it is spoken, dy rhoin (if I 
went); dy n’aasagh oo mooar (if thou 
wouldst grow big).  
dy, pre. (pronounced dhe) of, when placed 
before substantives; as, lane dy arroo (full 
of corn); laad dy ooir (a load of earth); kuse 
dy hollan (a quantity of salt), &c.; there 
may be exceptions nevertheless; as, veih 
boayll dy boayl, [1] Chron. xvii. 5: Son cha 
vel mee er chummal ayns thie er-dyn laa hug 
mee lhiam seose Israel, derrey’n laa jiu; agh ta 
mee er ve scughey veih boayl dy boayl, as veih 
cabbane dy cabbane. For I have not dwelt in 
an house since the day that I brought up Israel 
unto this day; but have gone from tent to tent, 
and from one tabernacle to another; although I 
think that dy there is only as a substitute or 
corruption for gys or dys.  
dyn 
er-dyn, adv. since. 
116 
E 
 
E 
E, for its sound see Remarks 9 and 10; and its 
changes as a radical initial, see 40, 46, 47, 
121, &c.; and in words where it is second 
letter after f, see 11 and 48.  
E or Eh, in. of wonder or surprise.  
e, pro. his, her, hers. The words initialled by 
mutable consonants that follow the e (his), 
change or aspirate, but those following e 
(her), do not. See 112 and 113. E (her) 
changes initial vowels, as shown in 14 and 
40.  
eab or eabb*, s. m. an attempt, effort, or 
push; to say or do some thing; pl. -aghyn. 
eab or eabb*, v. attempt, &c.; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -ey, 82; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha deab, v. did not form or plan. E 
eabit, 85. planned, formed, cut out, 
marked, &c.  
s’eabit, a. how planned or formed for some 
work or state. E 
eabee, s. m. a person, &c. partly taught, 
formed or planned to some particular work 
or use.  
ead or eadee, v. be jealous; -agh, 77; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
geadagh or geadaghey, v. 61. jealous, 
being jealous. I cannot describe this word 
in the English as I ought, as there is no verb 
for it in that language. E  
dy eadagh or dy eadaghey, v. to be jealous 
or have jealousy.  
e headagh, v. her being jealous. E  
eadolagh, a. jealous, suspiciously fearful.  
s’eadolagh, a. how jealous. E  
s’eadolee, a. id., comp. and sup. E 
eadolys, s. f. jealousy, suspicious fear.  
e headolys, s. her jealousy. E 
eaddagh, s. m. woollen cloth, wearing 
apparel; pl. 72 [change -agh to -eeyn].  
eaddagh ceau (wearing clothes). 
e headdagh, s. her clothes; pl. 72. E  
eaddee, a. d. of woollen cloth, of wearing 
apparel.  
aa-eaddagh, s. m. second-hand clothes. 
eaddagh-asstan, linings; 
eaghtyr, s. m. surface, superfice, upper part; 
pl. -yn.  
e heaghtyr, s. her surface. E  
laue yn eaghtyr, adv. the upper or whip 
hand, victory. 
lout-eaghtyr, s. f. a deck. 
eaghtyragh, a. d. belonging to the surface 
or uppermost part; a. superficial, shallow.  
eairk, s. m. a horn; pl. -yn.  
e heairk, s. her horn. E  
eairkagh, a. having horns, horned.  
s’earkagh, a. how horny. E 
s’earkee, a. id., comp. and sup. E 
jeelt eairkagh, a horned saddle. 
eaisht, v. hark, listen, hearken; <pl. -aghyn;> 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
cha n’eaisht, v. not hearken, listen, or hear; 
-agh; -ee; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. E  
deaisht or deaishtee, v. did listen, 
harkened, listened. E geaishtagh or 
geaishtaghey, v. 61. listening, hearkening, 
hearkeneth, listeneth listens, &c. E  
dy eaishtaghey, v. to listen, to hearken.  
er n’eaishtaghey, v. hath, &c. hearkened, 
&c. E  
eaishtit, 85. listened, hearkened.  
eaishtagh 
far-eaishtagh, s. f. the act of lending a deaf 
ear, pretending to be deaf. Prov. “Cha vel 
fer erbee cha bouyr, as eshyn nagh jean 
clashtyn.” [None is so deaf as he who will 
not hear. (The proverb belongs with 
clashtyn rather than with eaisht.)] 
eaishteyder, s. m. a listener, a hearkener; 
pl. -yn.  
e heaishteyder, s. her listener. E  
eajee, a. odious, abominable, hateful, 
abhorrent, hideous.  
s’eajee, a. how odious or abominable, 
comp. and sup. E 
eajeeys, s. m. odiousness, odium, 
abominableness.  
e heajeeys, s. her odiousness. E  
eallyn, s. pl. chops, the sides of the mouth.  
eam, s. m. call, cry, shout; pl. -yn. 
Prov. “Un eam gys bee, as jees gys obbyr.” 
[One call to food and two to work.] 
117 
E 
 
e heam, s. her call. 
eam, v. id. -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
cha n’eam, v. not shout, call, or cry; -agh. 
-ee; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. E  
deam, v. 8. did cry out. See deie. E  
geam, geamagh, or geamaghey, v. 61. 
calling, crying, shouting. E  
dy eamaghey, v. to call, to shout.  
er n’eamaghey, v. hath, &c. called, &c. E  
eameyder, s. m. a caller, a shouter; pl. -yn.  
Ean, s. m. John, in sacred or solemn 
discourse, but in common talk it is Juan.  
eanin or eaynin, s. m. a precipice; pl. -yn. 
eannee or eaynnee, a. d. of [a] precipice. 
ny heaynnee, a. d. of the precipice or hogh. 
E  
earish, s. weather; sometimes applied to foul 
weather in opposition to emshir, which 
some say ought to be applied to fair or fine 
weather. It is also used for time of life as, 
ooilley earish my vea (all the time of my 
life); pl. -yn; Gen. xlviii. 15: As vannee eh 
Joseph as dooyrt eh, Jee, kiongoyrt rishyn ren 
my ayraghyn Abraham as Isaac gimmeeaght, y 
Jee ta er m’y niartaghey ooilley earish my vea, 
derrey’n laa t’ayn jiu. And he blessed Joseph, 
and said, God, before whom my fathers 
Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God which 
fed me all my life long unto this day, and 1 
Peter, i. 17: As my ta shiu genmys eshyn nyn 
Ayr, ta fegooish jannoo soiagh jeh persoonyn, 
briwnys cordail rish obbyr dy chooilley 
ghooinney, ceau-jee earish nyn droailtys ayns 
shoh ayns aggle. And if ye call on the Father, 
who without respect of persons judgeth 
according to every man’s work, pass the time of 
your sojourning here in fear. 
ny hearishyn, s. the weather, the times. E  
earkan, s. f. a lapwing; pl. -yn.  
earrag, s. f. a pullet, a young hen or fowl; pl. 
-yn.  
earroo, s. m. number; pl. -yn.  
e hearroo, s. her number. E  
earroo-airhey, s. m. the golden number.  
earroo, v. 
cha n’earroo, v. not number or count; 
-agh; -ee; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. E  
earrooagh, a. numerous, manifold, 
multitudinous; [Jer.] xlvi. 25: Cur-my-ner, 
kerree-yms No earrooagh, as Pharaoh, as 
Egypt, marish ny jeeghyn oc, as nyn reeaghyn; 
dy feer, Pharaoh, as adsyn ooilley ta treishteil 
ayn. Behold, I will punish the multitude of No, 
and Pharaoh, and Egypt, with their gods, and 
their kings; even Pharaoh, and all them that 
trust in him; and 1 Kings, iii. 9: Cur er-y-fa 
shen da dty harvaant cree tushtagh, dy vriwnys 
dty phobble, dy voddym cronnaghey eddyr mie 
as sie: son quoi ta abyl dy vriwnys ad shoh dty 
phobble ta cha earrooagh? Give therefore thy 
servant an understanding heart to judge thy 
people, that I may discern between good and 
bad: for who is able to judge this thy so great a 
people?  
s’earrooagh, a. how numerous. E 
s’earrooee, a. more and most numerous. E 
eary or aeree, s. f. an open airy place.  
eash, s. f. age; pl. -yn.  
ny heashyn, s. the ages, the generations. E  
brash-dy-eash, well up in age. 
myneash, s. m. minority. 
eayl, s. f. lime; pl. -yn.  
e heayl, s. her lime. 
gheayil, a. d. of lime; as, aaie-gheayil. G 
[sc. eayil] 
claghyn-geayl, s. the stone, or what is 
termed gravel in the bladder. [sc. eayl/eayil; 
Kelly: clagh uaill] 
eaylley, a. pl. (sic) lime.  
eayll* or eayllee, v. lime; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha n’eayll* or n’eayllee, v. not lime; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. E  
deayllee, v. 8. did lime, limed. E  
geayllagh, v. 61. liming, covering with 
lime. E  
dy eayllaghey, v. to lime.  
er n’eayllaghey, v. hath, &c. limed. E  
eayllit, 85. limed, covered with lime.  
s’eayllit, a. how limed. E 
eaylleyder, s. m. one who limes.  
eayllymyn, s. pl. hettles, a part of a weaver’s 
loom.  
118 
E 
 
eayn, s. m. a lamb.  
eayin, s. pl. lambs.  
ny heayin, s. the lambs. E  
eaynagh, s. m. a desert, a waste.  
eaynnee, a. d. of a desert or wilderness. 
eigney, s. See eaynagh.  
eayst, s. f. moon; pl. -yn.  
sy n’eayst, s. m. in the moon. E  
ny heayst, a. d. of the moon. E  
eayst-noa, s. f. a new moon.  
fo-yn-eayst, a. sublunary. 
ec, pre. at. Something might be said for this 
word, as is for da.  
echey, (ec eh), p. his, he, of him, he, &c. 
has, hath, have, had, &c, &c.; as, shoh yn 
thie echey; (this is his house or home); ta 
fys echey (he knoweth); te echey (he has got 
it); ve echey (he had it), &c.; -syn, id. em.  
eck, pro. her, hers, of her, she has, she had, 
&c. -sh, id. em. 
oc, pro. their, them, they have, they had, 
&c.; as, yn vaagh oc (their beast), ny vud oc 
(among them), te oc (they have it), ve oc 
(they had it, &c.); -syn, id. em.  
aym, pro. my, mine, of me, I have or had; 
-s.  
aym-pene, pro. having it myself.  
ain, pro. our, us, of us, we have, we had, 
have, &c. we; as, yn thie ain (our house); 
ren eh beaghey ny mast’ ain (he lived 
among us); te ain (we have it); ve ain (we 
had it); row eh ain (had we it), &c.  
ainhene, pro. have, had, &c. ourselves.  
ayd, pro. thee, thine, of thee, thou hast, 
have or hadst; as, shoh yn obbyr ayd (this is 
thy work, or this work is thine, or of thee); 
vel eh ayd (hast thou got it, or got him); te 
ayd (thou hast it); -s, id. em.  
eu, pro. (ec shiu), your, you, ye, of you, 
you have, you had, &c.; as, yn obbyr eu 
(your work); daag mee eu eh (I left it with 
you); nagh row fys eu (did ye not know); te 
eu (you have it); ve eu (you or ye had it), 
&c.; -ish, id. em.  
edd, s. m. a hat; a nest; pl. idd.  
idd, a. d. of nest or nests, of hat or hats.  
e hedd, s. her hat, her nest. E  
sy n’edd, s. in the hat, in the nest. E  
idd, s. pl. nests; Psl. civ. 17: Ayndoo ta ny 
eeanlee jannoo nyn idd: as ta ny biljyn-juys 
ynnyd-cummal son y stork. Wherein the birds 
make their nests: and the fir-trees are a 
dwelling for the stork; hats, Dan. iii. 21: Eisht 
va ny deiney shoh kianlt ayns nyn gooatyn, nyn 
oashyryn, as nyn idd, as nyn eaddagh elley, as 
v'ad ceaut stiagh ayns mean yn choirrey 
aileagh-loshtee. Then these men were bound in 
their coats, their hosen, and their hats, and 
their other garments, and were cast into the 
midst of the burning fiery furnace.  
e hidd, s. her hats; her nests. I  
nyn nidd, s. pl. your, &c. hats, nests. I  
edd-ushag, s. m. a bird’s nest.  
eddeyder, s. m. a hatter; pl. -yn.  
eddin, s. f. a face, front, &c.; pl. -yn.  
e heddin, s. her face. E  
sy n’eddin, s. in the face. E  
Etymology: oï dooinney.  
glaare-eddin, s. f. forehead; pl. -yn. 
eddrym, a. light in weight, not heavy. This 
word, no doubt, is from oï trome (opposite 
to heavy). 
s’eddrym, a. how light in weight, comp. 
and sup. E 
eddrym, v. lighten, make light; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
eddrymee, v. make light or lighter.  
cha n’eddrym or n’eddrymee, v. not 
lighten in weight; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms, 94. E  
deddrymmee, v. 8. did lighten or make 
lighter in weight. E 
geddrymagh or geddrymaghey, v. 61. 
making lighter in weight, making light. E  
dy eddrymaghey, v. to lighten or make 
lighter.  
eddrymmid or eddrymmys, s. m. 
lightness, want of weight, levity.  
eddyr, pre. betwixt, between. Prov. “Eddyr 
daa stoyl ta toyn er laare!” [Betwixt two 
stools the breech is on the floor.] 
edyr, conj. either, neither, not at all, whether 
or no, one or other.  
ee, pro. she, and sometimes her. The 
following passage has them both in: “Ghow 
ee breïd as choodee ee e heddin” (she took 
119 
E 
 
a veil and covered her face). [Gen. xxiv. 65: 
Son dooyrt ee rish y stiurt; Quoi yn dooinney 
shoh ta ayns y vagher shooyl nyn guail? as 
dooyrt y stiurt, My vainshtyr t’ayn: shen-y-fa 
ghow ee breïd, as choodee ee e eddin. For she 
had said unto the servant, What man is this that 
walketh in the field to meet us? And the servant 
had said, It is my master: therefore she took a 
vail, and covered herself [but here, ee = she 
in both occurrences.]  
ee[-]hene, pro. herself.  
ee, v. eat; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha n’ee, v. not eat; -agh; -in; -ym. -yms, 
94. E  
d’ee, v. 8, did eat, ate; Mat. xiii. 4:  
As myr v’eh cuirr, huitt paart jeh’n rass rish oirr 
y raad, as haink ny eeanlee, as d’ee ad seose 
eh. And when he sowed, some seeds fell by 
the way side, and the fowls came and devoured 
them up. E  
gee, v. 61. eating. E  
eeit or eet, 85. eaten, ate. Sometimes 
improperly sounded uit. Prov. “Ta bee eeit 
jarroodit.” [Eaten food is forgotten.] 
eeder or eeddyr, s. m. an eater; pl. -yn. The 
latter spelling is quite absurd, although it is 
made use of in Jud. xiv. 14: As dooyrt eh 
roo, Ass yn eeddyr haink magh bee, as magh 
ass y fer lajer haink miljid. And he said unto 
them, Out of the eater came forth meat, and out 
of the strong came forth sweetness. [No doubt 
a typo, for eedyr, or eedeyr. The Bible has 
two occurrences of eeder and one of 
eederyn.] 
eean or yeean, s. m. 47. a chicken, the young 
of a fowl of any kind, a fowl.  
yeean, s. m. a chicken, a chick, the young 
of any fowl. This word is also written 
without a y. Prov. “Ta’n yeean myr e 
ghooie my vel clooie er e chione.” [The 
chick is like his kind before there are 
feathers on his head.] 
eeanlee, s. pl. 47 [ji-]. fowls, the fowls of 
the air.  
yeeanlee, s. pl. fowls, the fowls of the air. 
E  
eean-reap, s. f. 47 [ji-]. corn-creak, rail.  
eïn, s. pl. chickens, the young of fowls.  
ny heïn s. the chickens, the young of fowls. 
E  
eeanleyder, s. m. 47 [ji-]. a fowler; pl. -yn.  
eearree or yeearree, s. 47. desire, wish.  
yeearree, s. f. a desire, a wish. E  
deearree, v. did desire or desired. E  
geearree, v. 61. greeting; desiring, 
beseeching. E  
yeearrit, 85. desired. E 
eearlys or yeearlys, s. m. 47 [ji-]. earnest.  
yeearlys, s. m. an earnest. E 
yeearreeoil, a. desirable. E  
yeearreyder, s. m. one that desires; pl. -yn.  
eeass or eeassee, v. 47 [ji-]. lend, borrow; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
yeeass or yeeassee, v. 42. lend or borrow; 
-agh; -ee; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. 
deeassee, v. did lend, lent, borrowed. E  
geeassaghey or geeassaght, v. 61. lending, 
lendeth, lends. E  
dy eeassaghey, v. 47 [ji-]. to lend, to 
borrow.  
dy yeeassaghey, v. to lend, to borrow.  
yn eeassaght, s. m. 47 [ji-]. the loan or 
lending; pl. -yn.  
eeassee, a. d. 47. of lending or of 
borrowing.  
eeassit, 85. 47 [ji-]. lent, borrowed.  
yeeassit, 85. lent, borrowed. 
s’eeasit, a. how lent or borrowed. E 
eeasseyder, s. m. 47 [ji-]. a lender, a 
borrower; pl. -yn; a creditor. 2 Kings, iv. 1: 
Ta dty harvaant my heshey marroo; as ta fys 
ayd s dy row dty harvaant ayns aggle y Chiarn: 
as ta’n eeasyder er jeet dy ghoaill da hene my 
ghaa vac dy ve e harvaantyn bondee. Thy 
servant my husband is dead; and thou knowest 
that thy servant did fear the Lord: and the 
creditor is come to take unto him my two sons 
to be bondmen. See also yeeaseyder, s. m. a 
borrower.  
yeeaseydagh, s. m. a lender; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee]; Pro. xxii. 7: Ta’n berchagh reill 
harrish y voght, as ta’n yeeaseyder ayns 
ammys yn yeeaseydagh. The rich ruleth over 
the poor, and the borrower is servant to the 
lender.  
120 
E 
 
eeast, s. m. 47 [ji-]. a fish; pl. -yn. 
yeeast, s. m. 42. fish; pl. -yn. 
sy n’eeast, s. in the fish. E or Y  
eeast, v. fish; -agh, 77; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
yeeast, v. fish; -agh; -ee; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94.  
deeast or deeastee, v. did fish or catch 
fish. E  
dy eeastagh or eeastaghey, v. 47 [ji-]. to 
fish, to angle.  
dy yeeastaghey, v. to fish or catch fish. <J>  
er n’eeastaghey, v. hath, &c. fished. E or 
Y  
eeastee, a. d. 47 [ji-]. of fishing or angling.  
yeeastee, a. d. of fishing.  
slat-eeastee, s. f. a fishing rod. 
eeastit, 85. 47 [ji-]. fished.  
s’eeastit, a. how fished. E 
eeasteyr, s. m. 47 [ji-] a fisher or 
fisherman, an angler; pl. -yn. 47 [ji-]. 
yeeasteyr, s. m. a fisherman; pl. -yn.  
eeasteyragh, a. d. of a fisher or angler.  
yeeasteyragh, a. d. of a fisher or 
fisherman. 
eeasteyrys, s. m. 47 [ji-]. the trade or craft 
of a fisherman.  
eebr or eebree, v. banish, send to exile; -agh, 
77; -in; 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88.  
deebr or deebree, v. did banish, banished, 
did drive away, compel to quit, expelled. E  
cha n’eebr* or neebree, v. not drift or 
banish away; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 
94. E  
geebyrt, v. 61. banishing, driving, drifting. 
E  
dy eebyrt, v. to drive away, to banish.  
er n’eebyrt, v. hath, &c. drifted, &c. E  
eebrit, 85. banished, transported, sent to 
exile.  
s’eebryt, a. how drifted or driven. E 
eebyrtagh, s. m. a banished person; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
eebyrtys, s. m. banishment.  
eeck, v. pay; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
cha n’eeck, v. not pay; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms, 94. E  
deeck, v. did pay, paid.  
jeeck, [v.] paid. See also deeck. E  
geeck, v. 61. paying; Prov. “Geeck cabbyl 
marroo.” [Paying a dead horse.] E  
eeckit, 85. paid, rewarded.  
s’eeckit, a. how paid or well paid. E 
eeck, s. m. a payment; pl. -yn.  
e heeck, s. her payment.  
eeckeyder, s. m. a payer, one who pays.  
eeh, s. f. suet or fat of an animal before it is 
melted.  
eek, s. f. a small stack or rick. 
eek, v. stack or rick; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha n’eek, v. not rick or stack; -agh; -in; 
-in; -ym, &c.  E  
geekey, v. 61. making ricks of turf. E  
eekey, v. stacking, ricking. 
eekit, 85. stacked, ricked.   
eekeyder, s. m. one who stacks or ricks.  
eem or eeym, s. f. butter; Gen. xviii. 8: As 
ghow eh eeym as bainney, as y lheiy v’eh er 
n’aarlaghey, as hoie eh shoh kiongoyrt roo. 
And he took butter, and milk, and the calf which 
he had dressed, and set it before them.  
eeym, s. f. butter; pl. -yn. See eem. Had 
eem been the orthography made use of 
throughout the Scriptures, it would not 
have confounded it with eeym (I will eat). 
The Hebrew of butter is hemah.  
e heeym, s. her butter; pl. -yn. E  
eeymmey, a. d. of butter; as, crockan 
eeymmey (a crock of butter).  
braghtan-eeymey, s. m. a buttercake, or a 
cake spread or spotted with butter or any 
other eatable. 
eerey, s. f. the length that a plough team 
plough in a field without turning; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn].  
eerey hallooin.  
mooir[-]eerey, s. f. a billow; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn]; billows, the rising of the 
sea by wind, the motion made on standing 
corn by wind.  
yn vuir[-]eirey, s. the billow. M 
eggey, s. f. a web; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
121 
E 
 
e heggey, s. her web; pl. 67. E  
eggey varree, a. d. a web of tow. 
egin, s. f. force, compulsion, rape, constraint; 
want of help; Deut. xxii. 25: Agh my yiow 
dooinney ayns y vagher ben aeg nasht, as 
goaill ee er-êgin as lhie mâree, eisht she’n 
dooinney ny-lomarcan, ren lhie mâree, vees er 
ny choyrt gy-baase. But if a man find a 
betrothed damsel in the field, and the man 
force her, and lie with her: then the man only 
that lay with her shall die; extortion. Ez. xxii. 
12: …t’ou er ghoaill use as bishaghey, as t’ou 
dy sondagh er ghoaill vondeish er egin dty 
naboonyn, as t’ou er my yarrood. … thou hast 
taken usury and increase, and thou hast 
greedily gained of thy neighbours by extortion, 
and hast forgotten me.  
e heigin or hegin, s. her want of help. E  
er-eigin or egin, s. on force; Jud. xx. 5: As 
dirree deiney Ghibeah m’oï, as ren ad chionney 
orrym mygeayrt y thie ’syn oie, er-chee dy my 
varroo; as my ven ghow ad er-êgin, dy vel ee 
marroo. And the men of Gibeah rose against 
me, and beset the house round about upon me 
by night, and thought to have slain me: and my 
concubine have they forced, that she is dead. 
shegin, v. (shyin) must, shall. 
cha nhegin, v. (sounded neign), must not. S  
beign da, v. that he must; Mat. xvi. 21: Veih 
yn traa shen magh ren Yeesey toshiaght dy 
hoilshaghey da e ostyllyn, kys dy beign da goll 
seose gys Jerusalem. From that time forth 
began Jesus to shew unto his disciples, how 
that he must go unto Jerusalem.  
eginagh or eignagh, a. forcibly, in want of 
help, compulsive; s. m. a person who wants 
force or help; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
eign* or eignee, v. force, compel, constrain, 
oblige; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha n’eign* or n’eignee, v. not force. E  
deign or deignee, v. did force or compel, 
compelled, or was obliged to comply. E  
degn or degnee, v. did force. See deign. E  
geignagh or geignaghey, v. 61. forcing, 
compelling, compelleth; urging, urgeth, 
urges, forceth, forces, &c. E  
geginaghey, v. 
dy eginaghey, v. to force, to compel, to 
straiten so as to make to comply, to 
constrain. For the other derivatives of this 
verb, see eign.  
dy eignaghey, v. to force, compel, &c.  
er n’eignaghey, pt. hath, &c. forced, &c. E  
eignit, 85. forced, compelled, obliged, 
straitened; Luke, xii. 50: Agh ta bashtey 
ayms dy ve er my vashtey lesh, as kys ta mee 
eginit, derrey vees eh er ny chooilleeney? But I 
have a baptism to be baptized with; and how 
am I straitened till it be accomplished. 
s’eignit, 85. how forced, compelled, or 
obliged. E 
eginagh or eignagh, a. forcibly, in want of 
help, compulsive; s. m. a person who wants 
force or help; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
s’eignagh, a. how needy, or in what want 
of help or force to do a thing. E 
s’eignee, a. id. [comp. and sup.], 58. E 
eigneyder, s. m. a forcer, a ravisher, a 
compeller; pl. -yn.  
eglhin[-]olley, s. m. linsey woolsey.  
eh, pro. he, it, and sometimes him, as in 2 
Kings, xi. 2: as dollee ad eh (and they hid 
him): As ghow Jehosheba, inneen ree Joram, 
shuyr Ahaziah, Joash mac Ahaziah, as gheid 
ee eh veih mastey mec y ree v'er ny choyrt gy-
baase, as dollee ad eh as e voandyr ayns 
shamyr veih Athaliah, myr shen nagh row eh er 
ny stroie. But Jehosheba, the daughter of king 
Joram, sister of Ahaziah, took Joash the son of 
Ahaziah, and stole him from among the king's 
sons which were slain; and they hid him, even 
him and his nurse, in the bedchamber from 
Athaliah, so that he was not slain.  
eh-hene, pro. himself.  
eshyn, pro. (eh shen), him, he; the em. of 
eh.  
ehlley, s. m. attachment, intimacy, taken up 
with, very fond of, so as to be entirely 
taken up with. Perhaps ellyn has some 
analogy to this word.  
eie, s. m. idea; as, cha row eie aym er (I had 
no idea of it).  
eie, s. m. meddle; as, cha dug mee eie er (I did 
not meddle with him or it). This word may 
seem strange as it has no substantive in 
English.  
122 
E 
 
gyn-eïe, adv. without meddling, besides. 
Jud. xx. 17: As va earroo cloan Israel, gyn-eïe 
er cloan Venjamin, kiare cheead thousane 
deiney-cliwe; v’ad shoh ooilley deiney-caggee. 
And the men of Israel, beside Benjamin, were 
numbered four hundred thousand men that 
drew sword: all these were men of war. 
eie, v. shout, cry, call, call out; -agh, 77; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 87; -ys, 88. Prov. “Cha 
nee yn wooa smoo eieys smoo vlieaunys.” 
[It is not the cow that calls most that gives 
the most milk.] 
deie, v. shouted or did shout or call. E  
eieit, eiet, or eit, 85. called, cried for, called 
by name.  
eït, 85. called, cried to. See eieit.  
s’eit, a. how called or shouted for. E 
eig, a. stale, flat, vapid. 
eig, v. 
cha n’eig, v. not deaden, get flat or stale; 
Prov. “Cha n’eig yn choo ta caaee ny 
hoyn.” [The greyhound is not sluggish 
which has seeds in its posterior. G.W. 
Wood] E  
eilkin, s. m. an errand, a message; pl. -yn.  
e heilkin, s. her errand. E  
eill, v. arm, fit with armour or arms; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86, -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
cha n’eill* or neillee, v. not arm or equip, 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. E  
d’eill or deillee, v. did arm or equip with 
armour. E  
eillit, 85. armed, fitted for war.  
s’eillit, a. how armed. E 
eilley, s. f. armour; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
eilley vroghil, s. m. breast armour, 
harbergeon. 
eilley chaggee, s. f. armour for war.  
eirey, s. m. an heir, an inheritor; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn]. 
eirey inneen, s. f. an heiress.  
e heirey, s. her heir. E  
’sy n’eirey, s. in the heir. E  
eiraght, s. m. inheritance, patrimony; pl. 64 
[-yn].  
e heiraght, s. her inheritance. E  
’sy n’eiraght, s. in the inheritance. E  
dy eiraghey, v. to inherit. (Seldom used.)  
eirinagh, s. m. a farmer, a husbandman, an 
agriculturist, a yeoman; pl. 71 [change -agh 
to -ee]. 
erinagh, s. pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]. See 
eirinagh.  
’sy n’eirinagh, s. in the farmer or 
husbandman. E  
eirinagh maillee, s. m. a farmer that holds 
a farm on rent.  
eirinys, s. m. husbandry, agriculture, 
farming.  
erinys, s. See eirinys.  
gerinys, s. 61. farming, husbandry. E  
eisht, adv. then, at that time; -agh, then em.  
eiy, s. f. the foot lock of a lanket; pl. -ghyn.  
eiystyr, s. m. a halter, a tie; pl. -yn.  
e heiystyr, s. her halter; pl. -yn. E  
eiyr, v. drive, follow; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins. 84; -ym, 86; -yms 87; -ys, 88.  
cha n’eiyr* or n’eiyree, v. not drive. E  
d’eiyr, v. drove or did drive, did follow. E  
geiyrt, v. 61. driving, following. E  
dy eiyrt, v. to drive, to follow.  
eiyrit, 85. driven, followed.  
s’eiyrit, 85. how driven. E 
er-eiyrt, v. following after, pursuing after; 
-s, id. em.  
 er nyn eiyrt, adv. p. following after us, 
in pursuit of.  
eiyreyder, s. m. a driver, a follower; pl. 
-yn. See also eiyrtysagh.  
eiyrtys, or eiyrts, s. certain consequences.  
eiyrtysagh, s. m. a follower, an imitator or 
copier; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]. 
 e heiyrtyssagh, s. her follower; pl. 
71. E  
eiyrt ‘bolster’ 
kione eiyrt or edeiyrt, s. the head of the 
bed. 
elgys, s. f. spite, choler, fierceness.  
e helgys, s. her malignity. E  
elgysagh, a. spiteful, spitefully; Mat. xxii. 
6: As ghow yn chooid elley ny sharvaantyn 
echey, as ghell ad dy elgyssagh roo, as varr 
ad ad. And the remnant took his servants, and 
entreated them spitefully, and slew them; 
123 
E 
 
choleric, fierce; s. m. a spiteful person; pl. 
71 [change -agh to -ee].  
s’elgyssagh, a. how implacable, in anger, 
choler, or spite.  
s’elgyssee, a. id. em. [comp. and sup.], 58. 
E 
ellag, s. f. hickup or hiccough; pl. -yn. Ellag 
aase as ellag y vaase. [Weak hickup and 
death hickup.] 
ellan, s. f. an island; pl. -yn.  
e hellan, s. her island. E  
‘sy n’ellan, s. in the island. E  
ny hellan, a. d. of the island. E  
ellanagh, s. m. an islander; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee].  
ny hellanee, s. the islanders. E 
elley, pro. and adv. other, another, else. Aght-
elley (otherwise).  
ellyn, s. f. manners, behaviour, 
communications, mein.  
emshir or emshyr, s. f. weather, seasonable 
weather. From imbagh (a season).  
’sy n’emshyr, s. in the weather. E  
kione emshir, s. a weather head in the air. 
emshiroil, a. seasonable, opportune.  
emshiroilid, s. m. seasonableness.  
enn or ennee, v. feel; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha n’enn or n’ennee, v. not feel; -agh E  
cha denn or dennee, v. did not feel. Prov. 
“Cha dennee rieau yn soogh y shang.” 
[The well-fed never felt like the ill-fed.] E  
gennaght or gennaghtyn, v. 61. feeling, 
feels, feeleth. E  
dy ennaght, v. to feel, to perceive by touch.  
er n’en[n]aghtyn, v. hath, &c. felt. E  
ry-ennaghtyn, v. to be felt, or being felt. 
ennit, 85. felt.  
s’ennit, a. how felt. E 
ennaghtyn, s. m. feeling, sympathy; pl. 
-yn.  
ennaghtyn-booisal, s. m. grateful feeling, 
gratitude.  
enneyder, s. m. a feeler; pl. -yn.  
ennaghtagh 
s’ennaghtagh, a. how feelingly. E 
s’ennaghtee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. E 
neu-ennaghtagh, a. unfeeling, insensible. 
ennoil, a. endearing, beloved.  
s’ennoil (sic: stress), a. how beloved or 
endeared. E 
s’ennoiley (sic: stress), a. id., comp. and 
sup. E 
ennoilid or ennoilys, s. m. endearment, 
love.  
ennagh 
fer ennagh, a. (pronounced ehnnagh), 
some one; red ennagh (something).  
ennal, s. f. breath; pl. -yn.  
’sy n’ennal, s. in the breath. E  
ennalagh, a. d. of the breath.  
ennee, a. identical; as, yn dooinney shen 
ennee (that identical man).  
enneeyn, s. pl. brains. This word has no 
singular in the Manks.  
inçhyn, s. pl. brains. See also enneeyn.  
enney, s. m. knowledge, as respects knowing 
one person, place, thing, &c., from another. 
For the more extensive meaning of the 
word knowledge, see tushtey.  
enn or enney, v. [s.] to know or have 
knowledge of.  
b[’]aashiagh-enn, adv. easy to know or 
well known. 
b[’]urrys-enn, adv. See baashiagh-enn. 
surrys-enn, adv. allowed to be well 
known. 
ennym, s. m. name, epithet, appellation; pl. 
see enmyn.  
e hennym, s. her name. E  
enmey, a. d. of a name or names.  
enmyn, s. pl. names, epithets, appellations.  
e henmyn, s. her names; or as it is in Acts, 
i. 15, ny henmyn (the names): As ayns ny 
laghyn shen hass Peddyr seose mastey fir-
eiyrtee [Yeesey] as dooyrt eh, (va earroo ny 
henmyn cooidjagh mysh shey-feed). And in 
those days Peter stood up in the midst of the 
disciples, and said, (the number of names 
together were about an hundred and twenty). E  
far[-]ennym, s. m. a bye name, a nick 
name, an agnomen, a name besides the real 
one. 
enm* or enmee, v. name; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
enmys, s. m. as much as that it could be 
124 
E 
 
named, a little more than nothing;  
enmys, v. name; as, enmys y lhiannoo shoh 
(name this child); -agh, 77; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -yn, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
denmys, v. nominated, named.  
genmys, v. 61. naming, nominating. E  
er-ny-enmys, v. hath or having, &c. been 
called or named.  
enmysit, 85. named, nominated, called by 
name.  
s’enmysit, a. how named or nominated. E 
far-enmyssit, 85. nick named, bye named, 
falsely so called; 1 Tim. vi. 20: …freill shen 
ny ta er ny choyrt gys dty churrym, shaghney 
glare mee-chrauee as fardalagh, as streeu 
mychione yn ynsagh shen ta far-enmyssit 
creenaght. …keep that which is committed to 
thy trust, avoiding profane and vain babblings, 
and oppositions of science falsely so called. 
entreil, v. 
gentreil, v. 61. entering.  
eoyll or eoyllee, v. dung, manure; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
cha n’eoyll or n[’]eoyllee, v. not dung or 
manure; -agh; -ee; -in; -ins. E  
deoyll or deoyllee, v. did dung, dunged.  
geoyl or geoyll*, v. 61. dung; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys. E  
geoyllaghey, v. 61. dunging, manuring.  
dy eoyllagh or eoyllaghey, v. to dung or 
manure.  
er n’eoyllaghey, v. hath, &c. dunged. E  
eoyllit, 85. dunged, manured.  
s’eoyllit, a. how dunged. E 
eoylley, s. f. dung, manure, ordure, muck, 
excrement; pl. 67 [change -ey to -aghyn].  
eoylleyder, s. m. one that dungs, &c.; pl. 
-yn. 
er, pre. on; p. p. on him or on it; -syn, id. em. 
When an adjunct, prefixed to verbs, means 
hath, have, having, has, had, hast, hadst, 
&c. It is also a contraction of fer, after 
feminines, which see.  
er, in. on, of incitement.  
er-hene, a. on himself; reserved, coy.  
urree, p. p. on her; -ish, id. em. 
urree-hene, p. p. on herself. 
orroo, p. p. on them; -syn, id. em.  
orroo-shid, p. p. on those.  
orroo-shoh, p. p. on these.  
orrym, p. p. on me; -s, id. em.  
orrympene, p. on myself.  
orrin, p. p. on us; -yn, id. em.  
ort, p. on thee; -s, id. em.  
erriu, adv. p. on you or ye; -ish, id. em.  
er-aggle, adv. for fear, lest. Er is 
sometimes translated, for, as in this word, 
though more literally it should be, on.  
er-ash, adv. to appear after being hid, 
hidden or concealed; to become damp, as 
such things as have salt in them, will in 
moist weather; in Ez. xvii. 9 it means, 
prosper: Myr shoh ta’n Chiarn Jee dy ghra, Jig 
eh er-ash? nagh jean eshyn eh y astyrt ass ny 
fraueyn, as e vess y yiarey jeh, dy jean eh 
fioghey? Thus saith the Lord God; Shall it 
prosper? shall he not pull up the roots thereof, 
and cut off the fruit thereof, that it wither?  
er-bastal, ad. past, past all.  
erbey or erbe, adv. because, lit. on cause.  
er-cannoo, a. enamoured, dotingly fond; 
Ez. xxiii. 12: V’ee er-cannoo lurg ny 
Assyrianee e naboonyn, captanyn as fir-reill, 
coamrit yindyssagh stoamey, markiagh er 
cabbil, ad ooilley deiney aegey aalin. She doted 
upon the Assyrians her neighbours, captains 
and rulers clothed most gorgeously, horsemen 
riding upon horses, all of them desirable young 
men.  
er-çhea, v. fleeing, fled; roie-er-çhea 
(retreating).  
er-çhee-goll, adv. about to go.  
 er-çhee dy yannoo (about to do, about 
to act).  
er-coontey, adv. on account.  
er-creau, v. trembling, shuddering, 
quivering; Hab. iii. 16: Tra cheayll mee, va 
my chree traishtit: va my veillyn er-creau ec yn 
choraa: ren loauid greimmey my chraueyn, as 
va mee ooilley er-creau: When I heard, my 
belly trembled; my lips quivered at the voice: 
rottenness entered into my bones, and I 
trembled in myself.  
er-dwooaie, a. determined to resist.  
er-dy, adv. ago.  
 er-dy-henney, adv. since that, since 
then, ago.  
 er-dy-rieau, adv. from eternity, for the 
125 
E 
 
ever which is past, all the time that hath 
been. See rieau.  
er-dyn, adv. since.  
er-eigin or egin, s. on force; Jud. xx. 5: As 
dirree deiney Ghibeah m'oï, as ren ad chionney 
orrym mygeayrt y thie 'syn oie, er-chee dy my 
varroo; as my ven ghow ad er-êgin, dy vel ee 
marroo. And the men of Gibeah rose against 
me, and beset the house round about upon me 
by night, and thought to have slain me: and my 
concubine have they forced, that she is dead.  
er-fenniu, adv. furiously, fiercely.  
er-fload, adv. on float, afloat.  
er-gerrey, a. nigh, at hand, at a short 
distance, near.  
er-ghlee, v. a breaming. A sow pig is said 
to be so when she wants the boar.  
er-giyn, a. next after; laa er giyn (the day 
after); on again; Luke, vii. 11: As haink eh 
gy-kione yn laa er-giyn dy jagh eh gys ard-
valley va enmyssit Nain. And it came to pass 
the day after, that he went into a city called 
Nain.  
er-gooil or er-gooyl, adv. in arrear, behind 
hand, behind. 
er-jeid, a. on edge, as teeth; Jer. xxxi. 30: 
Agh yiow dagh unnane baase son e 
pheccaghyn hene: dy chooilley ghooinney ee-
ys mess soor y villey-feeyney, bee e eeacklyn 
er-jeid. But every one shall die for his own 
iniquity: every man that eateth the sour grape, 
his teeth shall be set on edge.  
er-jerrey, adv. lastly, in line, latterly, 
behind, not in front.  
er-lesh, p. he conceives or imagines; -yn, 
id. em.  
 er-lhiee, p. she imagines, &c.; -ish, id. 
em. 
 er-lhieu, p. they, &c. conceive, &c.; 
-syn, id. em.  
 er-lhiam, p. methinks, I conceive, or 
imagine.  
 er-lhien, p. we imagine or conceive; 
-yn, id. em.  
 er-lhiat, p. thou conceivest, &c.; -s, id. 
em.  
 er-lhieu, p. ye or you conceive, &c.; 
-ish, id. em. 
er-lheh, adv. apart, separately, severally, 
privately, chiefly; a. private, particular.  
er-lhimmey, adv. except, save.  
er-lhiurid, adv. at length, at full length, 
along on the ground.  
er-louyn, adv. on a rope, by the hand, 
along.  
er-mayrn, a. remaining, to fore, left, yet 
alive.  
er-meshtey, a. drunk or drunken. Prov. 
“Laa er-meshtey as laa er ushtey.” [A day 
drunk and a day on water.]  
er-nearey, a. ashamed, for shame.  
er-niart, adv. by might or force of arms.  
er-nonney, adv. else, or else, at least.  
er-ny, v. having, being.  
er-oie, adv. by night, on the night.  
er-shen, adv. on that, thereon, thereupon.  
er-shoh, adv. whereupon, on this.  
er-skyn, adv. above; super.  
 er-skyn-earroo, a. innumerable.  
 er-skyn-insh, a. unutterable, 
unspeakable.  
 er-skyn-towse, a. immeasurable.  
 er-e-skyn, adv p. above him; -s, id. em.  
 er-my-skyn, p. p. above me; -s, id. em.  
 er nyn skyn, adv. p. above us, you, 
them.  
 er-dty-skyn, adv. p. above thee; -s, id. 
em.  
er-sooyl, in. away; pt. gone.  
 er-sooyl-jee, adv. p. away with you or 
ye.  
 er-sooyl-lhiat, adv. p. away with thee.  
er-troailt, v. travailling in child birth.  
er-y-chione, adv. on the head, ahead.  
er-y-chooyl, adv. shortly, by and bye, 
presently.  
er-y-fa, adv. therefore, wherefore.  
er-y-gherrit, adv. lately, shortly.  
er-y-ghrunt, adv. on the ground, aground.  
er-y-lieh, adv. on the half, by the half.  
er-yn-oyr, conj. because, on the cause.  
er-y-traa t’ayn ta lhie yn stayd beayn ain. 
(on our present time depends our future 
state).  
erbee 
fer erbee, a. anyone; mas.; cre-erbee 
(whatever).  
126 
E 
 
Erin, s. f. Ireland. See Nerin.  
Nherin, s. Ireland. Prov. Mie Mannin, mie 
Nherin. [Good for Mann, good for Ireland.] 
erin, s. f. vestry; 2 Kings, x. 22: As dooyrt eh 
rishyn va harrish yn erin, Cur-jee lhieu magh 
coamraghyn son ooilley ooashleyderyn Vaal. 
And he said unto him that was over the vestry, 
Bring forth vestments for all the worshippers of 
Baal.  
erree, a. latter end of, become of, end of.  
s’erree, a. how end, become of, meaneth; 
Acts, ii. 12: As v’ad ooilley fo atchim as imnea, 
gra yn derrey yeh rish y jeh elley, Cre s’erree 
da shoh? And they were all amazed, and were 
in doubt, saying one to another, What meaneth 
this?; befallen, how will the end be; Deu. 
xxix. 28: As d’astyr y Chiarn ad ass y cheer oc 
ayns e arg, as ayns e chorree, as ayns e 
yymmoose vooar, as hilg eh magh ad gys 
cheer elley, myr s’erree daue jiu. And the Lord 
rooted them out of their land in anger, and in 
wrath, and in great indignation, and cast them 
into another land, as it is this day. E 
erreeish (sic: stress), s. f. compassion, pity, 
sympathy, feeling for, by granting relief to 
those in distress; pl. -yn.  
erreeishagh, a. compassionate, easily 
affected with sorrow or pain on viewing the 
calamities or distresses of others as if our 
own, sympathetic.  
s’erreeishagh, a. how compassionate. E 
s’erreeishee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. E 
neu-erreeishagh, a. incompassionate; s. m. 
a person void of compassion; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. 
erreish, adv. after, or after what has been said 
or done.  
errey, s. m. incumbrance, burden, something 
irksome to be borne, yoke; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn].  
y n’errey, s. the yoke, the encumbrance, or 
burden.  
e herrey, s. her burden or encumbrance. E  
thie errey, s. m. an infirmary. 
erroo, s. m. a ploughman, one that holds the 
plough when ploughing; pl. -yn.  
irroo, s. pl. ploughmen, the pl. of erroo.  
erroogh, s. m. a chimb; pl. -yn.  
eshlyn or eshlys, s. a shroud.  
essyl, s. f. an axle or axis; pl. -yn.  
essyn, s. m. a post, jamb of a door, the post of 
a door frame or gate; pl. -yn.  
y n’essyn, s. the door post. E  
etl or etlee, v. fly; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha n’etl or n’etlee, v. not fly. E 
detlee or dettyl, v. flew, did fly.  
jetlee, v. flew. See also detlee. E 
getlagh, v. 61. flying. E  
er n’etlaghey, v. hath, &c. flown or flew. E  
eulys, s. f. fury, indignation, rage, madness.  
eulyssagh, a. indignant, inflamed with 
anger or rage, furious; s. m. a furious 
person; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
s’eulyssagh, a. how indignant or inflamed 
with anger, furious. E 
s’eulyssee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. E 
eunys, s. m. ecstacy, delight, pleasure, 
rapturous pleasure; pl. -syn.  
eunyssagh, a. ecstatic, delightful, pleasant, 
delectable, affording pleasure in the highest 
degree; s. m. an enjoyer of ecstatic 
pleasure; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
s’eunyssagh, a. how delectable, with what 
rapturous delight. E 
s’eunyssee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. E 
Ew 
yn Ew, s. the Jew.  
127 
F 
 
F 
For the sound of this letter see Remark 11, 
and for its changes see 48; it is an initial in no 
words except radicals and their derivatives; 
there are no words from other letters that 
come under it. 
fa. This adjunct is affixed to a few words, and 
signifies, for; as, in cren-fa, shen-y-fa; but 
the for is changed to fore, as in wherefore, 
&c. See also Faba. 
er-y-fa, adv. therefore, wherefore. 
faag, v. leave, quit, abandon; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
aag, v. leave, (from faag); -agh, -ail, -ee, 
-in, -ins, -ym, -yms, -ys, 94. F  
daag, 8. left, did leave. F  
cha vaag, v. not leave; -agh; -in; -ym. F  
cha n’aag, v. not leave or forsake; -agh; 
-ee; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. F 
faagail, v. leaving, quitting, &c. 
er vaagail, v. hath, &c. left. F  
er n’aagail, v. hath, &c. left, &c. F  
faagit, 85. left, abandoned, &c.  
s’faagit, a. how left or deserted. F 
faagit-mooie, 85. indicted by the petty or 
grand jury. 
faageyder, s. m. one who leaves, &c. 
faaid, s. m. a turf, a sod; pl. -yn. 
faaie, s. f. (from fo-hie), a field called in 
English, a flat, a field near or under a 
mansion house better manured than the 
other fields; pl. -aghyn. 
y n’aaie, s. the flat. F  
faanys, s. a breach in a fence; pl. -syn. 
faare, adv. nigh, near; Ex. xix. 12: Jeeagh-jee 
diu hene nagh jed shiu seose er y clieau, ny 
cheet faare yn oirr echey: quoi-erbee vennys 
rish y clieau bee eh son shickyrys er ny choyrt 
gy baase. Take heed to yourselves, that ye go 
not up into the mount, or touch the border of it: 
whosoever toucheth the mount shall be surely 
put to death. The word aare is from this 
word, which see. 
aare, <v. to come> [pre.] nigh or near to, to 
approach, <to come> in contact; Psl. xci. 7: 
Nee thousane tuittym rish dty lhiattee, as jeih 
thousaneyn ec dty laue yesh: agh cha jig eh 
dt’aare. A thousand shall fall beside thee, and 
ten thousand at thy right hand: but it shall not 
come nigh thee.  
faarg or faarge, v. fare, get by; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. The g in this word ought to be a j. 
cha vaargejagh, v. would not, &c., fare. F 
farral, v. fareing, to fare. 
faar-y-chaagh, a. fate or fare the same. 
faark or faarkee, v. bathe; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-ey, 82; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. 
cha vaark or vaarkee, v. not bathe; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys. F 
cha n’aark or n’aarkee, v. not bathe; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. F  
my aark or aarkagh, v. would, &c. bathe; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
F  
daark or daarkee, v. did bathe. F  
faarkey 
dy aarkey, v. to bathe. F  
er vaarkey, s. hath, &c. bathed. F  
er n’aarkey, v. hath, &c. bathed. F  
nyn vaarkey, s. your, &c. bathing. F 
faarkee, a. d. of bathing. 
faarkit, 85, bathed. 
s’faarkit, a. how bathed. F 
faarkeyder, s. m. a bather, or one who 
bathes. 
faarkey, s. m. the sea, and sometimes a 
billow or great wave; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
yn aarkey, s. (from faarkey), the sea.  
nyn vaarkey, s. your, &c., sea. F 
faarn, s. m. rain water dropping through the 
roof of a house. 
faasaag, s. f. beard; pl. -yn. 
e aasaag, s. (from faasaag), his beard.  
nyn vaasaag, [s.] your, &c., beard. F 
faasaagagh, a. having beard, bearded. 
s’faasaagagh, a. how full of beard. F 
s’faasaagee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. F 
faasaagey, a. d. of beard or beards; 
faasaagey, v. getting beard. 
faasagh, s. m. a wilderness, desert, or 
desolate place; pl. -yn.  
128 
F 
 
yn aasagh, s. the desert, or wilderness. F  
s’faasagh, a. how desolate. F 
faase, a. faint, feeble, weak, infirm, not 
strong. 
s’faase, a. how weak, slender, faint. F 
faase-rea, s. m. a tup that has been only 
half castrated. 
follym-faase, a. desolate; Jer. xxv. 38: T’eh 
er jeet magh ass e ooig, myr lion; son ta’n 
cheer oc follym faase, kyndagh rish dewilys yn 
tranlaasagh, as eulys e yymmoose. He hath 
forsaken his covert, as the lion: for their land is 
desolate because of the fierceness of the 
oppressor, and because of his fierce anger; 
Acts. i. [2]0: Son te scruit ayns lioar ny 
psalmyn, Lhig da’n ynnyd-vaghee echey ve 
follym faase, as ny lhig da dooinney erbee 
cummal ayn: as, Yn aspickys echey lhig da fer 
elley y ghoaill. For it is written in the book of 
Psalms, Let his habitation be desolate, and let 
no man dwell therein: and his bishoprick let 
another take. 
faasid, s. m. debility, weakness, 
faintishness. 
faaselagh, s. m. the weak part or parts of 
any thing, as of corn not well fed, &c. 
faast or faaste, v. wring, twist so as to 
squeeze the water out; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
cha n’aast, v. not wring; -agh; -ee; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms, 94. F  
my vaast, v. if wring; -agh; -in; -ym; -ys. F  
dy aast, v. to wring, (from faast); -agh; -ee; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys; 94.  
daast or daastee, v. did wring, wrung. F  
faastey, v. wringing, pressing the water out. 
er vaastey, v. hath, &c. wrung. F 
er n’aastey, pt. hath, &c. wrung. F  
faastee, a. d. of wringing, &c. 
faastit, 85. wrung, pressed. 
s’faastit, a. how wrung. F 
ro aastit, too much wrung, 85. F  
faast, s. m. a wring, &c.; pl. -aghyn. 
faasteyder, s. m. a wringer or squeezer. 
faastguin, s. f. a sponge; pl. -yn. 
faaue, s. m. a hint, a suggestion; pl. -yn. 
faayl, s. f. a turf spade; pl. -yn. 
Faba, a. If we give the fa in this word the 
meaning it has in cren-fa and ba (of cattle); 
it might mean, for cattle; or fa part of the 
word faiyr (grass), and ba as before (grass 
for cattle, or cattle’s grass). This is the 
name of a glen or valley in the vicinity of 
Peel from which that Sheading or 
Coroner’s District takes its name. 
fadane or fadanys, s. m. a place left 
uncultivated, a lonely or solitary place, 
solitude. 
fadaneagh, a. desolate, solitary, 
unfrequented, wild, uncultivated; s. m. an 
uncultivated person; pl. 71 [change -agh to 
-ee]. 
s’fadanagh, a. how solitary. F  
s’fadanee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. F 
fadanid, s. m. the state of being 
uncultivated, or of desolation, or solitude. 
faggys, a. near, nigh, adjacent.  
ro aggys, a. (from faggys), too near.  
s’faggys, a. how near or nigh, comp. and 
sup. See sniessey. F 
shilley-faggys, a. purblind. 
snessey or sniessey, a. nearer, nearest; the 
comp. and sup. of faggys. 
by-niessey, adv. because of nearness, 
nearest; Deut. xxi. 6: As nee ooilley shanstyr 
yn ard-valley shen by niessey da’n varroo, 
niee nyn laueyn erskyn y cholbagh ta’n chione 
goit j’ee ’sy ghlione. And all the elders of that 
city, that are next unto the slain man, shall 
wash their hands over the heifer that is 
beheaded in the valley, and 1 Chron. xxvii. 
7: Yn chiarroo chaptan son y chiarroo vee, va 
Asahel braar Yoab, as Zebadiah e vac by-
niessey da. The fourth captain for the fourth 
month was Asahel the brother of Joab, and 
Zebadiah his son after him.  
my-niessey, adv. next to, by, nearest to; 
Num. ii. 20: As my-niessey dasyn vees tribe 
Vanasseh. And by him shall be the tribe of 
Manasseh. 
faghid, s. m. disdain, derision, contempt, 
ridicule, mockery; pl. -yn. 
faghidagh, a. contemptible, deserving of 
scorn; s. m. a scorner; pl. 71 [change -agh 
to -ee]. 
129 
F 
 
s’faghidagh, a. how deserving of scorn. F 
s’faghidee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. F 
fahney, s. m. a wart; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
lus ny fahn<n>aghyn, s. f. wartwort, 
spurge. 
fahnaghtagh, a. warty, grown over with 
warts. 
faik, v. see, see thou; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
faik-jee, v. see ye or you. 
va shid or vaik shid, in. a. see yonder. F 
aik, v. (from faikagh), would see; -agh; -ee; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94.  
cha naik or nak, v. not see; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms, 94. F  
vaik oo, v. didst thou see [?]. F 
cha vaik, v. 144. did not see; -agh; -in; 
-ym, 94. F 
fakin, v. seeing, beholding. 
faikin, v. seeing. See also fakin. 
dy akin, v. to see. F  
er vakin, v. hath, &c. seen; Luke, ii. 30: 
Son ta my hooillyn er vakin dty haualtys. For 
mine eyes have seen thy salvation. F 
er naikin, v. hath, &c. seen. This verb and 
naik and its declinables are not in Scripture; 
it is vaik which is used on solemn or sacred 
occasions, but naik in common 
conversation. F  
ry-akin, v. to be seen. Cha jinnagh 
dooinney ta coyrt dy ve ry-akin dy bragh 
jeirk sy dorraghys. [A man who gives in 
order to be seen would never do alms on 
the dark.] 
fakinit, 85. seen, beheld. 
s’fakinit, a. how seen or visible. F 
fakider, s. m. a seer; pl. -yn. 
hee, v. will, wilt, shall, shalt see; -agh; -ee; 
-in; -ins; -m; -ms; -ys, 94. The y in ym and 
yms is not used; but m and ms in the 
pronominals of this verb, 62. F  
honnick, v. did see, saw, <seen>. Perhaps 
from hee (seeing), and naik. See 62.  
faill 
aill, v. -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys.  
cha n’aill* or n’aillee, v. not fail; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms, 94. F  
nagh vail oo, v. that thou fail not; -agh; &c.  
daill, daail or dhaill, v. did fail, failed. F  
failleil, v. failing, falling short. For another 
pronunciation of this word see fajeil. 
dy ailleil, v. to fail. F  
er vail[l]eil, v. hath, &c. failed. F 
er n’ailleil, v. hath, &c. failed.  
fajeil, v. failing. This word is used by some 
instead of failleil, but I cannot say it is 
correct, as it is not once used in the 
Scriptures, to my knowledge. 
faillit, 85. failed. 
s’faillit, a. how much failed. F 
failleilagh, a. in a failing state, deficient, 
faulty. 
fail-y-vaaish, a. the failure of death, past 
recovery, sickness to death. 
faill, s. m. hire, wages; pl. -yn. 
e aill, s. (from faill), his hire, wages.  
e haill (sic), s. her wages or hire. F  
nyn vaill, s. your, &c. hire or wages. F  
faillee, a. d. of hire or wages. 
fer-ny-failley, s. m. a hireling [John x. 13. 
See below, fer-failt.] The last y in this word 
I think is wrong; it ought to be e. [Fer ny 
faillee in Isa. xvi. 14, and Isa. xxi. 16.] 
faill, v. hire, engage for wages; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. 
cha vaill, v. not hire; -agh; -in; -ym, 94 F  
cha n’aill or n’aillee, v. not hire; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms, 94. F  
daill or dhaill, v. did hire, hired. F  
failley, v. hireing, binding to serve. 
dy ailley, v. to hire. F  
er vailley, v. hath, &c. hired. F 
er n’ailley, v. hath, &c. hired. F  
failt, 85. hired, bound to service. 
s’failt, a. how hired. F 
dunver-failt, s. m. a ruffian. 
fer-failt, s. m. a hired man; John, x. 13: Ta 
fer-ny-failley chea, er-y-fa dy nee fer-failt eh, 
as nagh mooar-lesh son ny kirree. The hireling 
fleeth, because he is an hireling, and careth not 
for the sheep. 
failleyder, s. m. a hirer; pl. -yn. 
fainagh, s. f. a chariot; pl. 71 [change -agh to 
-ee]. I think the plural made use of in Psl. 
xx. 7 (Ta paart coyrt nyn marrant gys 
fainaghyn, as paart gys cabbil: agh nee shinyn 
130 
F 
 
cooinaghtyn er Ennym y Chiarn, y Jee ain. 
Some put their trust in chariots, and some in 
horses: but we will remember the Name of the 
Lord our God), to be incorrect, it being the 
plural of the next word [fainey], and not of 
this. 
e ainagh, s. his chariot; pl. 71. F  
fainey, s. f. a ring; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
e ainey, s. his ring; pl. 67. F  
fairaig (sic: stress), s. f. a lump in the groin or 
armpit; pl. -yn. 
faishnagh or faishnys, s. m. a telling before 
hand future events, foretelling, fortune 
telling, what is told by a fortune teller, 
generally used in a bad sense. 
faishnee, a. d. of or belonging to fortune 
telling, of knowledge before hand in future 
events of life. 
aaishnee, a. d. (from faaishnee), which see.  
ben-aaishnee, s. f. a female fortune teller. 
faiynt, a. faint; Isa. i. 5: Cre’n-fa veagh shiu ny-
sodjey er nyn gerraghey? nee shiu girree-magh 
ny smoo as ny smoo. Ta’n kione ooilley ching, 
as yn cree ooilley faiynt. Why should ye be 
stricken any more? ye will revolt more and 
more: the whole head is sick, and the whole 
heart faint. 
faiyr, s. f. grass; pl. -yn. 
yn aiyr, s. the grass; Mark, vi. 39: As 
doardee eh daue ad dy chur orroo ooilley soie 
sheese ayns sheshaghtyn er yn aiyr ghlass. 
And he commanded them to make all sit down 
by companies upon the green grass; Jas. i. 
10: Agh y verchagh ayns dy vel eh er ny 
injillaghey; son myr blaa yn aiyr nee eh lheïe 
ersooyl. But the rich, in that he is made low: 
because as the flower of the grass he shall 
pass away. F  
faiyr-choonlee, s. f. stubble grass. 
faiyr-guiy, s. f. goose grass. 
faiyr-feiyr, s. f. See guilley-bing. [The 
herb cockshead medic.] 
faiyr-finnan, s. f. a strong grass growing 
among corn. 
faiyr-shoggyl, s. f. rye grass. 
faiyr-sonnys, s. f. a kind of soft, whitish 
grass that grows in rich land. 
faiyr-voddee, s. f. couch grass. 
lheimmeyder-faiyr, s. m. a grasshopper. 
thollog faiyr, s. f. a shrew mouse, a field 
mouse. 
faiyragh, s. m. a litter or layer of hay or 
straw laid under corn on a kiln.  
falleays, s. m. the least glimpse of light, a 
small gleam or glance. 
falleaysagh, a. glimpses seen at intervals. I 
have no English adjective to show this 
word. 
fallogys, s. f. prognostication, divination; pl. 
-yn. 
fallogysagh, s. m. a prognosticator, a 
diviner. 
fam, s. m. stem of wrack or oarweed, a sea 
pine; pl. -yn. 
faml or famlee, v. wrack or manure with 
sea weed; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
cha n’aml* or n’amlee, v. not manure with 
sea weed; -agh; -in;-ins; -ym; -yms, 94. F  
daml or damlee, v. did wrack or manure 
with sea weed. F  
famlaghey, v. wracking, manuring with sea 
weed. 
famley. See famlaghey. 
dy amlagh, v. to manure with sea weed. F  
er vamlagh, v. hath, &c. wracked. F  
er n’amlaghey, v. hath, &c. wracked. F  
famlit, 85. wracked, manured with sea 
weed. 
s’famlit, a. how wracked. F 
s’amlit, a. how wracked, &c. F 
famlagh or famyragh, s. m. sea weed, oar 
weed, wrack; pl. -yn. 
famlee, a. d. of wrack or sea weed. 
amlee, a. d. of sea weed. F  
famleyder, s. m. one who manures with sea 
weed. 
famman, s. m. a tail; pl. -yn.  
e amman, s. his tail; pl. -yn. Cloie rish e 
amman. [Playing with his tail.] F  
e hamman (sic), s. her tail. F  
agherey-amman, s. f. a crupper. 
fammanagh 
s’fammanagh, a. how tailed. F  
s’fammanee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. F 
131 
F 
 
fann, v. flay; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
ann, v. -agh; -ey; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 
94.  
cha n’ann or n’annee, v. not flay; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. F  
dhan, v. did flay, flayed. F  
fanney 
er vanney, v. hath, &c. flayed. F 
er n’anney, v. hath, &c, &c. flayed. All 
those words from f are initialled by v, as 
specified under the word naikin.  
fannee, a. d. of flaying, peeling or stripping 
off the skin. 
bock-Yuan-fannee, s. m. the horse of one 
John, who had flayed it, and who 
afterwards was obliged to travel on foot; 
hence a man’s own legs and feet, or his 
stick, are so termed. 
fant, 85. flayed, peeled. 
s’fant, a. how flayed. F 
fanneyder, s. m. a flayer; pl. -yn. 
ann, s. (from fann), flay. 
fannag, s. f. a crow; pl. -yn. 
fannag-varrey, s. f. a cormorant. See also 
shag. 
fannag charragh 
y n’hannag charragh, s. the scald crow. F  
gleiy-fannag, s. f. duck’s meat. 
far, a. fresh; as, dullish-far-ushtey (fresh 
water dillise). 
farb, v. fret or inflame, as a sore; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. 
farbagh, v. fretting, inflaming. 
dy arbagh, v. to fret, rankle or corrode. F  
er varbagh, v. hath, &c. fretted; as a sore. 
F 
farbit, 85. fretted or vexed, as a sore. 
s’farbit, a. how fretted or inflamed. F 
farbyl, s. m. a trail or train, a tail. 
e arbyl, s. his train or trail; pl. 76 [farbil]. 
F  
far-chail, s. f. weed or weeds. The far in this 
word, and in many of those that follow, 
means, false, or not real. 
far-charkyl, s. m. a truss hoop. 
far-chass, s. f. a piece put on the shaft of a 
sledge car to lengthen it when worn too 
short; a false or wooden leg or foot; pl. -yn. 
far-chlashtyn, s. m. dulness of hearing, 
hard[ness] of hearing, not [being] able to 
hear well. 
far-chloie, s. m. foul play. See also drogh-
chloie. 
far-chooish, s. f. a fictitious cause, a cause 
adduced for instance. 
far-eaishtagh, s. f. the act of lending a deaf 
ear, pretending to be deaf. Prov. “Cha vel 
fer erbee cha bouyr, as eshyn nagh jean 
clashtyn.” [None is so deaf as he who will 
not hear. (The proverb illustrates the 
concept, not the word far-eaishtagh.)] 
far[-]ennym, s. m. a bye name, a nick 
name, an agnomen, a name besides the real 
one. 
far-enmyssit, 85. nick named, bye named, 
falsely so called; 1 Tim. vi. 20: …freill shen 
ny ta er ny choyrt gys dty churrym, shaghney 
glare mee-chrauee as fardalagh, as streeu 
mychione yn ynsagh shen ta far-enmyssit 
creenaght. …keep that which is committed to 
thy trust, avoiding profane and vain babblings, 
and oppositions of science falsely so called. 
far-folt, s. m. false hair, a wig. 
far-ghuillag, s. f. an artificial leaf. 
far-lheiy, s. m. a false conception of a calf, 
said to be generated between a cow and 
what is called a tarroo-ushtey. 
far-screeu, or far-scrieu, s. m. forgery; pl. 
-yn. 
 far-scrieuder, s. m. a forger; pl. -yn. 
far-scryss, s. m. the scarfskin or furfur, the 
cuticle, the scruff or dandriff. 
far-skeeal, s. f. a fable; pl. -yn. 
 far-skeealagh, a. fabulous. 
far-uinnag, s. f. a false window, an 
imitation of one, a recess in a wall. 
far-unnish, s. f. a scallion; pl. -yn. 
far-vaalys, s. m. from faiyr (grass); and 
maail (rent); hired or rented grass; Pro. 
xxvii. 26: Bee ny eayin ta son dty choamrey 
caillit, as farvaalys aber dty ghoair. The lambs 
are for thy clothing, and the goats are the price 
of the field; pl. -syn. 
far-ven, s. f. The far in this word is taken 
as a corruption of fer; an amazon, a virago, 
a woman of masculine appearance, or one 
132 
F 
 
who is master of her husband. The far, 
taken as false, will be one who is false to 
her wedded husband, one whom a man has 
besides his wife; pl. mraane-fir. 
far-vlaa, s. m. an artificial flower. 
far-voalley, s. m. a partition; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn]. 
fardail, s. m. vanity, folly, inanity; pl. -yn. 
dy ardail or ardalys, s. of vainness or 
vanity; pl. -yn, -syn. F  
fardailagh or fardalagh, a. vain, of little 
or no worth, diminutive, insignificant, 
unavailing. 
s’fardalagh, a. how vain, diminutive or 
insignificant. F 
s’fardalee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. F 
s’ardalagh, a. how vain, insignificant or 
diminutive. [F] 
s’ardalee, a. id., comp. and sup. [F] 
dy ardalagh, adv. vainly, insignificantly.  
fardailys, s. m. vainness, folly, emptiness, 
fruitless desire or pursuit; pl. -syn. 
ny nardalys, s. the insignificant or vain 
thing; pl. -syn. F  
fark, v. wait, stay; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
cha n’ark* or n’arkiee, v. not wait; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. F  
dark or darkee, v. did wait or waited. F  
fark[i]aghey or fark[i]aght, v. waiting, 
&c. 
dy arkiaght, v. (from farkiaght), to wait.  
er varkiaghey, v. hath, &c. waited. F  
er n’arkiaghey, v. hath, &c. waited. F  
farkee, a. d. of waiting. 
farkit er, 85. waited on. 
farkeyder, s. m. a waiter; pl. -yn. 
farkan-doallan, s. m. blindman’s buff. 
farkyl, s. m. a lid, a pot lid; pl. 76 [farkil]. 
farlane, s. m. a firlot; pl. -yn. 
farling or farleng, s. a farthing; pl. farleeyn. 
farney, s. m. black alder. 
farr, v. last; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
nagh var, v. not last; Psl. 119, (metre): 
Hee’m dy bee jerrey er dagh nhee, / Nagh var 
ad son de bra, / Agh lheead dty leighyn’s goll 
rhyt hene, / Cha jean dy bragh caghlaa. [I shall 
see that there shall be an end to everything; 
they shall not last for ever; but the breadth of 
Thy laws, like Thyself, shall never change. 
MWW] F  
arree, v. will last; as, arree eh choud rish 
hene (it will last as long as himself).  
cha n’arr* or n’arree, v. not last; -agh; 
-in; -ins, 94. F 
arrys, v. shall or shalt, will or wilt last or 
endure.  
darr, v. lasted or did last; 2 Chron. xxix. 
28: As hug ooilley’n pobble ooashley, as hie ny 
arranee lesh nyn giaull, as hied ny trumpeteryn: 
as darr shoh derrey va’n oural dy slane losht. 
And all the congregation worshipped, and the 
singers sang, and the trumpeters sounded: and 
all this continued until the burnt offering was 
finished. F  
farraght or farraghtyn, v. lasting, 
enduring. 
dy arraght, v. to last, or endure. F  
er n’arraght, v. hath, &c. lasted. F  
bragh-farraghtyn, a. everlasting. 
foddey farraghtyn, adv. long lasting. 
farrain, s. f. the herb avens, colewort, bonet, 
wild parsnip; pl. -yn. 
farrane, s. a fountain, a spring of water, a 
source, a spring or gentle breeze of wind; 
pl. -yn. 
farraneagh, a. having fountains or springs; 
a. d. of springs or sources. 
farrar, s. a wake, a vigil; pl. -yn. 
farrar, v. wake, or forbear sleep; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. 
farrarey, v. waking the dead, mourning; 
Jer. vi. 26: O inneen my phobble, jean aanrit-
sack y chryssey mood, as seiy oo hene ’sy 
leoie; jean farrarey trimshagh myr son ynrycan 
mac, yn dobberan s’doogh. O daughter of my 
people, gird thee with sackcloth, and wallow 
thyself in ashes: make thee mourning, as for an 
only son, most bitter lamentation. 
dy arrarey, v. to wake when dead. F  
farrarit, 85. waked. 
s’farrarit, a. how waked. F 
farrys 
farrys-thie, s. m. management in 
133 
F 
 
housekeeping, economy. 
e arrys[-]thie, s. m. his management of 
house affairs. 
farvane, s. f. a blank; pl. -yn. 
farvish, s. f. a forfeit. Far from false, and vish 
from bish; increase, a false increase. 
farvish, v. id. -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
farvishit, 85. forfeited. 
farvisheyder, s. m. a forfeiter; pl. -yn. 
fashagh or faitagh, a. timorous, timid, 
weakened with fear, fearful. 
s’faitagh, a. how fearful or timorous. F 
s’fashagh, a. See s’faitagh. F 
s’faitee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. F 
fasn or fasin, v. winnow, fan; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
asn, v. winnow; -in, -ins, -it, -ym. F  
asnagh, v. would winnow. F  
cha n’asn* or n’asnee, v. not winnow; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. F  
dasin or dasnee, did winnow, winnowed. 
[F]  
fasney, v. 
dy asney, v. to winnow.  
er vasney, v. hath, &c. winnowed. F 
fasnit, 85. winnowed, fanned. 
s’fasnit, a. how winnowed. F 
fasney, s. m. a winnowing; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn]. 
fasnee, a. d. of winnowing or fanning. 
asnee a. d. of winnowing; as, geay asnee. F  
mwyllin fasnee, s. f. a winnowing machine. 
fasneyder, s. m. a winnower, a fanner; pl. 
-yn. 
fass or fassee, v. feed, feed with grass; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88. 
assagh, v. would, &c. feed. 
fassaghey or fassaght, v. feeding. 
dy assaghey, 82, to feed or graze cattle.  
er vassaghey, v. hath, &c. fed with grass. F 
fassit, 85. fed, fed with grass. 
s’fassit, a. how fed with grass. F 
fasseyder, s. m. a feeder; pl. -yn. 
fasscadagh, s. m. umbrella; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee]. 
fast, s. m. quiet, silence, pensiveness; as, fea 
as fast. 
fastagh, a. modest, grave, sedate, serious, 
pensive, close. 
s’fastagh, a. how modest or serious. F 
s’fastee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. F 
fastid, s. m. modesty, seriousness, 
closeness. 
fastee, s. a shelter; pl. -yn. 
e astee, s. his shelter. F  
fasteeagh, a. having shelter, sheltry. 
s’fastee or s’fasteeagh, a. how sheltry, 
comp. and sup. F 
fasteeid, s. m. the state of the place of 
shelter. 
fastyr, s. m. evening; pl. -yn. 
yn astyr, s. the evening. F  
sy n’astyr, s. in the evening. F  
fastyragh, a. d. of the evening. 
fastyr-beg, s. late in the afternoon. 
mrastyr, s. m. an evening meal. Some 
think this to be the old Manks of dinner. 
mrastyr-beg, s. m. a luncheon in the 
evening. 
fea, s. m. quietness, rest, stillness. 
dty ea, s. thy rest or quietness. F  
nyn vea, s. your, &c. quiet, &c. F 
feagh, a. quiet, at rest, still. 
s’feagh, a. how quiet, still, or silent. F 
s’feaee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. F 
neu-feagh, a. unquiet, restless. 
feailley, s. m. festival, feast; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn]; a. holy, sacred, hallowed. 
feilley, s. See feailley. 
laa-feailley, s. a holy day, a festive day. 
bossan fealoin, s. f. mugwort. [feaill’Eoin] 
laa’l, s. (laa and eail, [i.e. feaill]) day and 
festival, but perhaps ought to be from laa 
and oie[’]l, the day and night of, or the vigil 
of the festival day. 
feaillere, s. an almanack, the calendar. 
feaillys, s. m. feriation, festivity, 
sacredness. 
feallagh or feallee, s. m. folk or folks.  
allagh, s. (from feallagh), folk. This word 
ought to be written eallagh. See 1 Kings, 
xx. 3: Lhiam’s ta dty argid, as dty airh, dty 
vraane myrgeddin, as dty chloan, eer yn allagh 
134 
F 
 
s’aalin jeu, t’ad lhiam’s. Thy silver and thy gold 
is mine; thy wives also and thy children, even 
the goodliest, are mine.  
e eallagh, s. (from feallagh), his folk; Mat. 
xxi. 36: Reesht hug eh magh sharvaantyn 
elley ny s’lhee na’n chied eallagh: as ghell ad 
roosyn er yn aght cheddin. Again, he sent other 
servants more than the first: and they did unto 
them likewise. F  
feanish, s. m. a witness, a testimony; pl. -yn. 
e eanish, s. his witness; pl. -yn. F  
e heanish (sic), s. her witness. F  
nyn veanish, s. your, &c. witness. F 
eanish, s. audience, those present; Zech. iii. 
7: My nee uss gimmeeaght ayns my raaidyn, 
as my nee uss my churrym y reayll, eisht nee 
uss myrgeddin briwnys ayns my hie’s, as freayll 
my chooyrtyn, as ver-yms dhyt ynnydyn dy 
hooyl orroo mastey yn slane eanish. If thou wilt 
walk in my ways, and if thou wilt keep my 
charge, then thou shalt also judge my house, 
and shalt also keep my courts, and I will give 
thee places to walk among these that stand by.  
feanish-sooilley, s. an eye witness. 
fenish, s. m. presence; a. present. 
e enish, to his presence. F  
nyn venish, s. their, &c., presence. F 
fenee, a. d. 
enee, a. d. of presence; as, kione-enee.  
kione enee, a. present, or in presence. 
ass-fenish, or assenish, a. not present. 
kione fenish, adv. in audience of, present. 
feaylley, s. m. eave, or as it is called easin; pl. 
67 [change -ey to -aghyn]. 
nyn veaylley, s. your, &c. eave. F 
feayn, a. wide, expansive. 
s’feayn, a. how wide, open, or extensive. F 
s’feayney, a. wider, widest. F 
feayn-foshlit, a. wide, open. 
feaynid 
yn feaynid-mooar, s. m. the great 
expansive void without boundary or limit. 
feaynys, s. m. wideness, width, expansion, 
extention. 
feayr, a. frigid, cold, chilly. 
s’feayr, a. how cold or frigid. F 
s’feayrey, a. colder, coldest. “Ny three 
geayghyn s’feayrey dennee Fion Mc Cooil: 
Geay henneu, as geay huill,  
As geay fo ny shiauill.” [The three coldest 
winds that Finn McCooil felt: thaw wind, 
wind through holes, and wind under the 
sails.] F 
feayrey, a. pl. cold, frigid. 
feayr or feayree, v. cool, make cold; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -yn, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
eayr or eayree, v. make cold, cool; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. F  
cha n’eayr<r>* or n’eayree, v. not cool; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. F  
deayree, v. did cool, or become less warm. 
F  
feayraghey, v. cooling, making cold. 
dy eayraghey, v. to cool. F  
er veayraghey, v. hath, &c. cooled. F 
er n’eayr<r>aghey, v. hath, &c. cooled. F  
feayree, a. d. of cold or cooling. 
fer-feayree, s. m. one above the number 
wanted in a work, one to cool while the 
others are working and taking turn about. 
feayrit, 85. cooled, made cold. 
s’feayrit, a. how cooled. F 
ro eayrit, 85. too cooled. F  
feayrid 
e eayrid, s. his coolness. F  
feayraght, s. m. cold, coldness, frigidity, 
frigidness, pl. -yn. 
nyn veayraght, s. your, &c. cold or 
coldness. F 
feayght, s. (a contraction of feayraght), 
cold. 
feayree, a. d. of cold or cooling. 
feayreyder, s. m. a cooler; pl. -yn. 
feayragan, s. m. a fan, a parasol; pl. -yn. 
feaysl or feayshil, v. loosen, unbind, untie; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
eaysl* or eayshil, v. untie, loosen; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. F  
cha n’eaysl or n’eayshil, v. not loose or 
untie; -agh; -ee; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. E  
deayshil, v. did untie, set at liberty. F  
feaysley, v. loosening, unbinding, untieing, 
setting free. 
dy eaysley, v. to let loose or unbind, to 
untie or unloose, to set free or at liberty. F  
er veaysley, v. hath, &c. loosed, set free or 
135 
F 
 
at liberty, untied. F 
er n’eaysley, v. hath, &c. loosed. E  
feayslit, 85. loosed, unbound, untied, set 
free. 
s’feayslit, a. how loosed or free. F 
ro eayslit, 85. too untied, too unloosed. F  
feaysley, s. m. looseness, freedom; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn]. 
feayslee, a. d. of loosening, unbinding, 
untieing or setting free; as, blein-feayslee 
(year of Jubilee). 
feaysleyder, s. m. one who unbinds, unties, 
loosens or sets free; pl. -yn. 
e eaysleyder, s. m. his one who unties or 
unlooses. F  
fed, s. m. an emotion of the body in laughing. 
fed, v. -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
feddal, v. shaking of the body in laughing. 
fed-gailley, s. m. the gurgle in the belly of a 
horse when rode hard. 
feddan, s. m. a flute, fife, whistle, pipe; pl. 
-yn. 
feddan, v. 
cha n’eddan or n’eddanee, v. not whistle; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. F  
feddanagh, v. whistling, to play on any 
musical instrument with the breath. 
er veddanagh, v. hath, &c. whistled. F 
er n’eddanagh, v. hath, &c. whistled. F  
fedjag, s. f. a feather; pl. -yn. 
e edjag, s. his feather; pl. -yn. F  
nyn vedjag, s. your, &c. feather. F 
fedjagagh, a. having feathers, feathered; 
a. d. of a feather or feathers. 
s’fedjagagh, a. how feathered. F 
s’fedjagee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. F 
fedjeen, s. f. the feather on an arrow; pl. 
-yn. 
fedjeen, v. feather the arrow; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
fedjeenit, 85. feathered as an arrow. 
fedjeenagh, a. having feathers as an arrow. 
fee, v. weaving, to weave; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
feeit, 85. wove, woven, platted. 
s’feeit, a. how wove or woven. F 
fidder, s. m. a weaver; pl. -yn. 
fidderagh, a. d. of or belonging to a 
weaver, as, spaal fidderagh (a weaver’s 
shuttle, or the shuttle of a weaver). 
cront-fidderagh, s. m. a weaver’s knot. 
fidderys, s. m. the trade or craft of a 
weaver. 
feeackle or feeackyl, s. f. a tooth; pl. 69 
[feeacklyn] for the former, and -yn for 
latter. 
dty eeackle, s. thy tooth; pl. 69. F  
nyn veeackle, s. your, &c. tooth. F 
e heeackle (sic), s. her tooth. E[F]  
’sy n’eeackle, s. in the tooth. F  
bossan feeackle, s. f. dog’s tooth, violet. 
feeacklagh, a. snappish, cross, crabbed, apt 
to bite, having teeth; Isa. xli. 15: Nee’m oo y 
yannoo myr greïe noa gyere-feeacklagh, ry-hoi 
tasteraght: as nee oo tasteraght ny sleityn, as 
broo ad dy myn, as nee oo ny croink myr coau. 
I will make thee a new sharp threshing 
instrument having teeth: thou shalt thresh the 
mountains, and beat them small, and shalt 
make the hills as chaff. 
s’fee[a]cklagh, a. how snappish or cross, 
how apt to bite, or use the teeth. F 
s’feeacklee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. F 
ro eeacklagh, a. too snappish. F  
feeagh, s. m. a raven; pl. see fiee and fee; 
Prov. “Cur meer da’n feeagh as hig eh 
reeisht.” [Give a piece to the raven and 
he’ll come again.] 
fee, s. pl. ravens. See also fiee [deest]. 
cass-feeagh, s. f. craws-foot, gold-knobs. 
craue-feeagh, s. m. a scald crow; pl. craue-
fiee. 
feeaghyn, s. pl. exactions, just debts, 
disbursements. 
e eeaghyn, s. pl. his debts; Mat. xviii. 25: 
Agh son wheesh as nagh row echey dy eeck, 
doardee e hiarn eh dy ve creckit as e ven, as e 
chloan, as ooilley ny v’echey, as e eeaghyn dy 
ve eeckit. But forasmuch as he had not to pay, 
his lord commanded him to be sold, and his 
wife, and children, and all that he had, and 
payment to be made. F  
feeaïh, s. a buck or doe, the deer kind. The 
sound of the word is the same in sing. and 
pl. but the pl. -ee is written [i.e. feeaihee], 
136 
F 
 
applied to buck and doe with firryn and 
bwoirryn. 
feed, s. twenty, a score; pl. -yn. 
dy eedyn, s. pl. of twenties. F  
feedoo, a. twentieth. 
yn eedoo, a. the twentieth; 1 Chron. xxiv. 
16: Yn nuyoo yeig er Pethahiah, yn eedoo da 
Jehezekel. The nineteenth to Pethahiah, the 
twentieth to Jehezekel. F  
feer, adv. very, in a great degree. 
dy feer, adv. truly, verily, really. 
s’feer, a. how true, true that, of a truth; Isa. 
xxxvii. 18: S’feer eh, Hiarn, dy vel reeaghyn 
Assyria er stroie ooilley ny ashoonyn, as ny 
cheeraghyn oc. Of a truth, Lord, the kings of 
Assyria have laid waste all the nations, and 
their countries. F 
s’pheer, a. how true; 2 Kings, xix. 17: 
Spheer eh, Hiarn, ta reeaghyn Assyria er stroie 
ny ashoonyn as ny cheeraghyn oc. Of a truth, 
Lord, the kings of Assyria have destroyed the 
nations and their lands. See s’feer as it ought 
to be written. P 
eer, adv. even, merely.  
sheer, d. true, sure, or about to; as, sheer 
loayrt er nyn son (about or sure to speak for 
us). Litany.  
sheeir 
beeir, adv. as, my beeir da (if what he says 
be true or to be heeded); the preterit or past 
tense of sheeir.  
feeu, a. worthy, worth. 
s’feeu, a. how worthy or worthy is. F 
s’feeuey, a. id., comp. and sup. pl. F 
sheeu, s. is worth, worthy. 
cha n’eeu, a. not worth, worthless; <Job, 
xviii. 12> [The reference belongs to neeu, 
a. q.v.]. F  
neu-feeu, a. unworthy, wanting merit, 
mean, inadequate, defective. 
beeau, (from by-fieau) worth, would be 
worth; syn. with beeagh. 
feeuid, s. m. worthiness, worth. 
feeagh, a. worth, value. 
s’feeagh, a. of how much value or worth, 
comp. and sup. F 
sheeagh, a. is worth; in value. 
cha neeagh, s. not worth, good for nothing. 
See also cha neeu. This word is written 
nieeagh (would wash), Jer. xiii. 10: Bee yn 
pobble mee-chrauee shoh, ta gobbal dy 
eaishtagh rish my ghoan, ta gimmeeaght ayns 
roonid nyn gree hene, as geiyrt er jeeghyn elley 
dy hirveish ad, as dy chur ooashley daue, bee 
ad eer myr y cryss shoh, nagh nieeagh veg. 
This evil people, which refuse to hear my 
words, which walk in the imagination of their 
heart, and walk after other gods, to serve them, 
and to worship them, shall even be as this 
girdle, which is good for nothing. F  
beeagh, v. would be worth.  
feeudys or feeudid, s. m. discretion, 
prudence; Pro. i. 4: Dy choyrt keeayll da’n 
ôney, da’n dooinney aeg, toiggal as feeudys. 
To give subtilty to the simple, to the young man 
knowledge and discretion. 
feeyn, s. m. wine; pl. -yn. 
dty eeyn, s. thy wine; Eccl. ix. 7: Immee 
royd, ee dty arran lesh boggey, as iu dty eeyn 
lesh cree gennal, son ta Jee nish jannoo soiagh 
jeh dty obbraghyn. Go thy way, eat thy bread 
with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart; 
for God now accepteth thy works. F  
feeyney, a. d. of or belonging to wine or 
vines. 
<feeyney, a. pl. wine or vines.> 
feeyn-geir, s. m. vinegar. 
feeyn-bane, s. m. white wine. 
feeyn-jiarg, s. m. red wine. 
fegooish, pre. without, not with. 
dt’ egooish, pre. without thee. F  
n’ egooish, pre. without, without him or it. 
F 
ny ’gooish, p. p. without him or it. [F] 
nyn vegooish, p. p. without us; 1 Cor. iv. 8: 
Nish ta shiu jeant magh, nish ta shiu berchagh, 
ta shiu er reill myr reeaghyn nyn vegooish: as 
dy baillish Jee dy jinnagh shiu reill, dy voddagh 
shinyn reill myrgeddin mêriu. Now ye are full, 
now ye are rich, ye have reigned as kings 
without us: and I would to God ye did reign, that 
we also might reign with you. F 
feh, s. m. a sinew, a tendon; pl. -yn. 
feie, a. wild, not tame, shy. 
feieys, s. m. venison, the flesh of a wild or 
untamed animal; a. fierce, wild, untame. 
137 
F 
 
feill, s. f. flesh, butcher’s meat; pl. -yn. 
dty eill, s. thy flesh; pl. -yn. F  
dy eill, s. of flesh; pl. -yn. F  
’sy n’eill, s. in the flesh. F  
feilley, a. pl. [?] flesh. 
foalley, a. d. of the flesh <or blood>,  
goaill-foalley, s. m. incarnation. 
foalley, a. carnal, lustful, sensual, corporal. 
s’foalley, a. how carnal or sensual. F 
feillagh 
s’feillagh, a. how fleshy. F 
s’feillee, a. more fleshy, most fleshy. F 
feiy, s. m. a fathom; pl. -yn or -ghyn. Perhaps 
the greatest measure then in use, because 
we say feiy laa (all or through the day); feiy 
ny cruinney (through the globe). See car. 
fey, s. a fathom. See feiy. 
feaï or fey. See feiy.  
un eiy, s. one fathom. F  
feiyjagh, a. tedious and grievous; Isa. xxi. 2: 
Ta ashlish feiyjagh er ny hoilshaghey dou. A 
grievous vision is declared unto me. 
feiyr, s. m. noise, fragor, din, clamour; pl. 
-yn. 
nyn veiyr, s. your, &c., noise. F 
faiyr-feiyr, s. f. See guilley-bing. [The herb 
cockshead medic.] 
feiyr, v. noise, &c.; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
feiyral, v. noising, making noise, sounding; 
2 Chron. xiii. 12: …ta Jee hene marin son 
nyn leeideilagh, as e haggyrtyn lesh trumpetyn 
feiyral. God himself is with us for our captain, 
and his priests with sounding trumpets to cry 
alarm against you; tingle, 2 Kings, xxi. 12: 
Cur-my-ner, ver-ym lhiam lheid yn olk er 
Jerusalem as Judah quoi-erbee chlinnys jeh 
nee e chleayshyn feiyral. Behold, I am bringing 
such evil upon Jerusalem and Judah, that 
whosoever heareth of it, both his ears shall 
tingle. 
er veiyral, v. hath, &c., noised or sounded. 
F 
feiyrit, 85. noised, sounded. 
s’feiyrit, a. how noised or clamoured. F 
feiyreyder, s. m. one who makes a noise; 
pl. -yn. 
feiyragh 
s’feiyragh, a. how noisy. F 
s’feiyree, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. F 
femblal, v. taking out here and there. 
feme, s. m. need, want, necessity; pl. -yn. 
e eme, s. his want, his need, or necessity. F  
nyn veme, s. your, &c., want. F 
femoil, a. needful, necessary, requisite. 
s’femoil, a. how needful or needed. F 
s’femoiley, a. more needy, most needy. F 
fen or fenee, v. ask, enquire; -agh, 77; -in, 88; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
my en* or enys, v. if ask or enquire; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. F  
cha n’en or n’enagh (sic), v. not ask or 
enquire. F  
denee, did ask or enquire, asked, &c. F  
fenaght or fenaghtyn, v. asking, asketh, 
&c. 
er venaghtyn, v. hath, &c., asked. F 
fenit, 85. asked, enquired. 
s’fenit, a. how after asked. F 
neu-enit or neu-fenit, pt. unasked, 
unsolicited. 
fend, v. defend; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms 87. -ys, 88. 
my end* or endys, v. if defend; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. F  
cha n’end, v. not defend; -agh; -ee; -in. F  
fendeil, v. defending. 
dy endeil, v. to defend. F  
er vendeil, v. hath, &c., defended. F 
er n’endeil, hath, &c. defended. F  
fendit, 85. defended. 
s’fendit, a. how defended. F 
fendeilagh, a. 
s’fendeilagh, a. how defensive. F 
s’fendeilee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,]58. F 
fendeilagh, s. m. a defender: pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee]. 
dty endeilagh, s. thy defender; pl. 71.  
fendeilys, s. m. defence; pl. -syn. 
dty endeilys, s. thy defence. F  
fendeyr, s. m. a fender; pl. -yn. 
fenniu 
er-fenniu, adv. furiously, fiercely. 
fent, s. m. a waist-band; pl. -yn. This word is 
opposed to lent. 
fent-mhuineel, s. f. a wrist-band. 
138 
F 
 
feoghaig, s. f. a periwinkle, a sea snail; pl. 
-yn. 
feoh, s. abhorrence, disgust, aversion, dislike. 
feohdagh, a. disgustful, filthy, nauseous; 2 
Peter ii. 7: As livrey eh Lot yn dooinney 
cairagh, seaghnit lesh ymmyrkey-bea 
feohdagh ny mee-chrauee. And delivered just 
Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation of the 
wicked. 
s’feohdagh, a. how filthy, foul or 
nauseous. F 
s’feohdee, a. filthier, filthiest. F 
feoh[d]oil, a. filthy, foul; Psl. xiv. 4: Agh 
t’ad ooilley er gholl ass y raad, t’ad ooilley-
cooidjagh er jeet dy ve feohdoil. But they are 
all gone out of the way, they are altogether 
become abominable. 
feohoilys, s. filthiness, foulness. 
feohdys, s. abomination, annoyance; Lev. 
xviii. 22: Cha jean oo lhie marish dooinney, 
myr marish ben: shen feohdys. Thou shalt not 
lie with mankind, as with womankind: it is 
abomination. 
feoilt, a. liberal, free, bounteous, generous, 
munificent. 
s’feoilt, a. how free or abundant in giving. 
F 
s’feoiltey, a. more or most, &c., id. F 
dy feoilt, adv. liberally, bountifully, &c. 
feoiltagh, a. bountiful, liberal, giving 
without grudging; s. m. a liberal person; pl. 
71 [change -agh to -ee]. 
s’feoiltagh, a. how liberal or bountiful. F 
s’feoiltee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. F 
dy feoiltagh, adv. liberally, bountifully, &c. 
feoiltys, s. m. liberality, bounty, giving 
largely; Acts, ii. 46: As taaghey yn chiamble 
gagh-laa lesh un aigney, as brishey arran ’sy 
thie ghow ad nyn meaghey lesh gennallys as 
feoiltys cree. And they, continuing daily with 
one accord in the temple, and breaking bread 
from house to house, did eat their meat with 
gladness and singleness of heart. 
fe[oi]sagh, a. flimsy, weak, slight, thin, 
limber, slender. 
s’feoisagh, a. how slight, limber, slender, 
fine. F 
s’feoisee, a. slighter, slightest. F 
fe[oi]sid, s. m. flimsiness, slightness, 
slenderness. 
fer, s. m. one, one male, a man. The sing. of 
fir. 
fir, s. m. pl. ones, male ones, the pl. of fer, 
men. 
nyn vir, s. your, &c., ones or men. F 
fer-[k]ionnee, s. m. & redeemer, a 
ransomer. 
fer-c<h>oadee, s. m. a protector; pl. fir-
choadee. 
fer-coyrlee 
 fir-choyrlee, s. pl. counsellors. 
 ir-choyrlee, s. counsellors. F  
fer-coonee 
 dty er-coonee, s. thy helper. F  
 fir-choonee, s. pl. helpers. 
fer-crauee-oalsey 
 yn er-crauee-oalsey, s. m. the 
hypocrite; Job, xxxiv. 30: Nagh lhisagh yn 
er-crauee-oalsey reill, er aggle dy beagh y 
pobble er ny hayrn ayns ribbey. That the 
hypocrite reign not, lest the people be 
ensnared. F  
fer-croo, s. m. creator. 
 nyn ver-croo, s. our, &c., creator. F 
fer-failt, s. m. a hired man; John, x. 13: Ta 
fer-ny-failley chea, er-y-fa dy nee fer-failt eh, 
as nagh mooar-lesh son ny kirree. The hireling 
fleeth, because he is an hireling, and careth 
not for the sheep. 
fer-gynoayl, s. m. a foreigner. 
fer-g<h>erjee or fer-ny-gherjagh, s. m. a 
comforter, a consolator, or consoler; pl. 
 fir-gherjee, s. pl. comforters, consolers. 
fer-insee 
 nyn ver-ynsee, s. our, &c., teacher, 
schoolmaster. F 
 dty ir-ynsee, s. thy teachers. F  
fer-ny-failley, s. m. a hireling.  
fer-lhee, s. m. a physician, a doctor or 
surgeon. 
fer livreyee, s. m. a deliverer; 2 Sam. xxii. 
2: As dooyrt eh, Yn Chiarn my chreg, my hoor 
lajer; as my er-livreyee. And he said, The Lord 
is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer. 
fer-mooinjerey, s. m. a man-servant. 
fer-oik, s. m. an officer, a person in office. 
 fir-oik, s. pl. officers; <Jer. xxvii. 9> 
139 
F 
 
[Fir-oik is not in that verse, though there 
are many examples elsewhere in the 
Bible.] 
 e ir-oik, s. his officers. F  
fer-feayree, s. m. one above the number 
wanted in a work, one to cool while the 
others are working and taking turn about. 
fer loayrt as lheh, s. m. an intercessor. 
fer loayrt er nyn son, s. m. one speaking 
for us. 
fer-raauee, s. m. a monitor, a warner. 
fer-reaghys, s. m. an umpire. 
fer-reill, s. m. a ruler, magistrate, or person 
in authority. 
 ir-reil[l], s. rulers; Isaiah, xlix. [7]: Myr 
shoh ta’n Chiarn, Saualtagh Israel dy ghra, as 
e Er-casherick, rishyn ta sleih soiaghey beg 
jeh, rishyn ta dwoaie yn ashoon, rish sharvaant 
dy ir-reill; Ver reeaghyn my-ner as troggee ad 
orroo, princeyn myrgeddin… Thus saith the 
Lord, the Redeemer of Israel, and his Holy 
One, to him whom man despiseth, to him 
whom the nation abhorreth, to a servant of 
rulers, Kings shall see and arise, princes also 
shall worship…. F  
ard-fer[-]reill, s. m. a supreme; 1 Pet. ii. 
1[3]: Jean-jee shiu hene y injillaghey gys dy 
chooilley leigh er ny oardaghey liorish deiney 
er graih yn Chiarn; edyr eh ve gys y ree, myr 
yn ard-fer-reil. Submit yourselves to every 
ordinance of man for the Lord’s sake: whether 
it be to the king, as supreme.  
fer-roogh, s. f. an eye lid, a lid; pl. -yn, 
[or] fir[-]roogh, s. pl. eye lids or lashes, 
lids. 
fer-shinney 
 yn er-shinney, s. the eldest one, 
masculine. F  
fer-sloo 
 yn er-sloo, s. the least, mas; Jer. viii. 
10: Shen-y-fa ver-yms ny mraane oc da 
feallagh elley, as ny magheryn oc da eiraghyn 
joarree: son ta dy chooilley unnane, veih’n er-
sloo gys yn er-smoo, sondagh er cosney. 
Therefore will I give their wives unto others, 
and their fields to them that shall inherit them: 
for every one from the least even unto the 
greatest is given to covetousness. F  
fer-smoo 
 yn er-smoo, s. the greatest, mas. F  
fer-thie 
 yn er-thie, s. the man of the house; Mat. 
xx. 11: As tra v’ad er ghoaill eh, ren ad tallagh 
noi yn er-thie. And when they had received it, 
they murmured against the goodman of the 
house. F  
 far-thie, s. m. (from fer-thie), the man 
of the house. 
 far-thie-mooar, s. m. major domo, the 
great man of the house. 
fer-roie, s. m. a deserter, a runner. 
fer-toshee, s. m. the foremost, the first in 
procession. 
fer-ynsee, s. m. a teacher;  
 fir-ynsee, s. pl. teachers, instructers. 
 e er-ynsee, s. his teacher, mas. F  
fir-chiaullee, s. pl. musicians; Rev. xviii. 
22: As cha bee kiaull claaseyderyn, as fir-
chiaullee, as piperyn, as fir-chayrnee, arragh 
er ny chlashtyn aynyd’s. And the voice of 
harpers, and musicians, and of pipers, and 
trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in 
thee. 
fir-chraie, s. pl. potters; 1 Chron. iv. 23: 
V’ad shoh fir-chraie, as adsyn va cummal 
mastey ny garaghyn-feeyney, as magheryn. 
These were the potters, and those that dwelt 
among plants and hedges. 
fir-obbee, s. pl. wizards, sorcerers; 2 
Chron. xxxiii. 6: …myrgeddin hug eh geill da 
traaghyn, as deiyr eh er obbeeys, as 
chliaghtee eh buitcheraght, as ren eh dellal 
rish spyrrydyn-faishnee, as rish fir-obbee. 
…also he observed times, and used 
enchantments, and used witchcraft, and dealt 
with a familiar spirit, and with wizards. 
fir-vaghee or veaghee, s. pl. livers, 
dwellers, inhabitants. 
fir-yssyree, s. pl. astrologers; Isa. xlvii. 
13: Lhig da nish ny fir-yssyree, ny 
rollageydee, as ny fallogyssee meeagh, 
shassoo seose as sauail oo veih shen ta kiarit 
dy heet ort. Let now the astrologers, the 
stargazers, the monthly prognosticators, stand 
up, and save thee from these things that shall 
come upon thee. 
ard-er, s. m. a chief; 1 Chron. xxvi. 10: Va 
ec Hosah, jeh cloan Merari, mec; Simri yn ard-
er, (son ga nagh row eh yn mac shinney, ny-
yeih ren e ayr eh yn ard-er). Also Hosah, of 
140 
F 
 
the children of Merari, had sons; Simri the 
chief, (for though he was not the firstborn, yet 
his father made him the chief). 
drogh-er 
 yn drogh-er, s. m. the evil one, 
masculine. 
ferg, s. f. ferocity, fierceness, anger, spite. 
farg. See ferg. 
fergagh, a. ferocious, fierce, spiteful, 
angry. 
s’fergagh, a. how ferocious, fierce. F 
s’fergee, a. fiercer, fiercest. F 
ferish, s. m. a fairy; pl. -yn. 
ferish, s. m. a hand steel to strike fire with a 
flint; pl. -yn. 
fess or fesst, s. a spindle; pl. -yn.  
e ess, s. his spindle. F  
y n’ess or y n’esst, s. the spindle. F 
fest, v. stick, stuck; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
my est* or estys, v. if st[i]ck; -agh; -ee; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. F  
cha vest, v. 144. not stick; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms, 94. F 
cha n’est* or n’estee, v. not stick. F 
dest, v. did stick, stuck, fastened. F  
festal, v. sticking, adhesive. 
dy estal, v. to stick or adhere. F  
er vestal, v. hath, &c., stuck. F 
er n’estal, v. hath, &c. stuck. F 
festit, 85. glued, stuck. 
s’fest[it], a. how stuck or fastened. F 
ro estit, 85. too stuck or glued. F  
festeyder, s. m. a sticker, an adherer. 
feysht, v. question, examine; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
my eysht* or eyshtys, v. if examine, 
question, peck out by questioning; -agh; 
-in; -ym; -ys. F  
deysht or deyshtee, v. did examine or 
questioned, did question or examined. F  
feyshtey 
dy eyshtey, v. to examine or question. F  
feyshtey-tessen, v. cross examining. 
er veyshtey, v. hath, &c., examined. F  
feyshtit, 85. questioned, examined. 
s’feyshtit, a. how questioned. F 
ro eyshtit, 85. too questioned, &c, &c. F  
feysht, s. a question; pl. -yn or -aghyn. 
feyshteyder, s. m. a questioner, a 
inquisitive person. 
yn eyshteyder, s. m. the examiner, &c.; pl. 
-yn. F  
fhynneig, s. f. a pod, a capsul; pl. -yn. 
fynneig. See fhynneig. 
s’fynneigagh, a. how well podded. F 
s’fynneigee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. F 
fhyt, s. m. a fit, a short time; pl. -yn. 
fiddyr, s. fry; brick fiddyr (trout fry). 
brick-fiddyr, s. pl. fry trout. 
fieau, v. resting or waiting quietly, desisting 
from doing something; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 88; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
fieaueyder, s. m. a rester, a waiter for. 
figgagh, a. of a fig or figs. 
figgan, s. m. a hoop for a sieve or peck; a 
figure, a trap to catch birds; pl. -yn. 
fill, v. fold, lap up; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
dhill, v. did fold or folded. F  
filley, v. folding, plaiting, lapping up, 
rolling. 
fillee, a. d. of folding or lapping up. 
fillit, 85. folded, lapped up. 
s’fillit, a. how folded. F 
neu-fill, v. unfold, unfurl. 
filley, s. m. a fold or lap, a double or crease; 
pl. 67 [change -ey to -aghyn]; er ny filley 
(folded). 
filleyder, s. m. a folder; pl. -yn 
filleag, s. f. a shawl; pl. -yn. 
fillosher, s. m. a needless ornament, or 
manoeuvre. 
fine, s. m. a scabbard, sheath, or quiver; pl. 
-yn. 
fingan, s. m. the cliff of a rock, a crag, the 
sharp point of a rock; oie’l fingan (the night 
preceding St. Thomas’s Day, said to be the 
longest night in the year). Perhaps called 
fingan, because on that day people went to 
the cliffs to catch venison or mutton for 
Christmas. Prov. “Faaid mooar moaney 
son oie’l fingan.” [A big sod of turf for St 
Thomas’s eve.] 
141 
F 
 
finigagh, s. m. knot grass. 
finnan, s. m. a kind of grass. 
faiyr-finnan, s. f. a strong grass growing 
among corn. 
fiogh, v. fade, wither; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
fioghey, v. withering, fading. 
fioghit or fiojit, 85. withered, faded. 
s’fioghit or s’fiojit, a. how faded, how 
withered. F 
firrin, or firriney 
yn irrin or irriney, s. the truth. F  
ard-losserey-firryn, the herb archangel. 
sy n’irrin, s. in the truth. F  
sy n’irriney, s. in the truth. id. em. Prov. 
Cha bee breager[e]y credit, ga dy ninsh eh 
y n’irriney. [A liar shall not be believed, 
though he speaks the truth.] 
firriney, a. d. of truth or verity. 
firrinagh, a. verily, true, of a truth, 
faithful. 
s’firrinagh, a. how true, true it is; how 
faithful, genuine, with what veracity or 
truth. F 
neu-firrinagh, a. untrue, unfaithful; s. m. 
an unfaithful person; pl. 71 [change -agh to 
-ee]. 
s’firrinee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. F 
firrinys, s. m. a truism, verity, truth, 
faithfulness. 
anfirrinnys, s. m. untruth; pl. -yn. 
flaiee, s. m. a fiend, an imp; pl. id. 
flaoil, a. fluent, eloquent. 
s’floaoil (sic), a. fluent or eloquent. F 
s’floaoiley, a. more fluent, most fluent. F 
flaoilid, s. m. fluency, eloquence. 
flaunys, s. m. heaven, the seat of God, of holy 
angels, and the blessed, a place of felicity, 
bliss, or happiness beyond the conception 
of mortal man. Of the etymology of this 
word it may be remarked that, as heavenly 
or spiritual things cannot be understood but 
by their being compared with things 
temporal, Mr. JAMES MACPHERSON, in a 
treatise un the immortality of the soul, page 
180, when speaking of the ancient Celts, 
says that it is from flath (noble or blessed) 
and innys (an island) the noble or blessed 
island. They imagined or believed that the 
virtuous went alter death to some noble, 
blessed, or happy island; and hence the 
word flaunys. Our phlaase (a palace) may 
also be from hence. This word is never 
made use of for the aerial heaven. See niau. 
flaunyssagh, a. felicitous, blissful, 
heavenly, angelic, celestial; s. m. an 
inhabitant of heaven; pl. 71 [change -agh to 
-ee]. 
s’flaunyssagh, a. how heavenly, angelic, 
felicitous, blissful, &c, &c. F 
s’flaunyssee. a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. F 
flee or flio, s. f. chicken weed, alsine. 
fleshen, s. m. twilled woollen cloth, blanket 
cloth. 
nyn vleshen, s. your, &c. blanket cloth. F 
fleshag, s. f. a rug; pl. -yn. 
fliaghey, s. m. rain; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
e liaghey, s. his rain. F 
fliaghee, a. d. of or belonging to rain. 
liaghee, a. d. of rain. F  
scaa[-]liaghee, s. f. an umbrella, a shade to 
cast off rain. 
fliaghagh, a. rainy, given to rain or 
showers, pluvial or pluvious. 
s’fliaghagh, a. how rainy. F 
s’fliaghee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. F 
ro liaghagh, a. too rainy. F 
flip, s. m. a fib, a lie; pl. -yn. 
flipperagh, v. telling fibs. 
flipperaght, v. dropping into water, as fish 
when playing. 
fliugh, a. wet. 
s’fliugh, a. how wet. F 
s’fliughey, a. wetter, wettest. F 
s’liughey, a. See s’fliugh. L 
fliugh, v. id; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
cha liugh, v. not wet; -agh; -ym; -yms; -ys, 
94. F  
my vliugh, v. if wet; -agh; -in; -ym; -ys, 
94. F 
fliughey, v. wetting, making wet; s. m. a 
wetting. 
dy liughey, v. to wet. F  
er vliughey, v. hath, &c. wetted. F 
142 
F 
 
fliughit, 85. wet, watered. 
s’fliughit, a. how saturated with wet. F 
fliugheyder, s. m. a wetter, one who wets. 
fliugh-niaghtee, s. sleet. 
fliughys, s. m. wetness; pl. -yn.  
e liughys, s. his wet or wetness. F 
fload, v. float; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
floadey, v. floating, flowing on the surface, 
flowing over. 
er-fload, adv. on float, afloat. 
floadran, s. m. a floatson. 
floag, s. f. a jot, a tittle, an atom. 
floagagh, a. having atoms, &c. 
flooyr, s. m. flour; pl. -yn. 
flout, s. a taunt, scandal, or reproach, a 
slander, or stigma, an aspersion, or 
scurrility; pl. -yn. 
flout, v. to taunt, &c.; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
floutagh, a. scurril, or scurrilous, taunting, 
reproachful, slanderous, aspersive, lewdly 
jocular. 
s’floutagh, a. how scurrilous or 
opprobrious. F 
s’floutee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. F 
floutyraght, v. giving reproach, scandal, or 
contempt, acting with a deceitful grin of 
civility in speech. 
flurt, s. m. a feast, &c., given at the finishing 
of work, the hireing of a crew on a vessel, 
&c. 
flustyrnee, v. faddling, doing little or nothing. 
fo, pre. under, beneath; p. p. under him; -syn, 
id. em. 
fosyn. See fo. 
fo-hene, p. p. under himself. 
fo-ee, p. p. under her; -ish, id. em. 
fo-ee[-]hene, p. p. under herself. 
foue, p. p. under them; -syn, id. em. 
foue-hene, p. p. under themselves. 
foym, p. p. under me; -s, id. em. Ta foym dy 
bee eh jeant (I have purposed it shall be 
done); Jer iv. 28: …er-y-fa dy vel mee er 
loayrt eh, ta foym dy bee eh jeant, as cha jean-
ym arrys y ghoaill, chamoo nee’m shen y 
chaghlaa. …because I have spoken it, I have 
purposed it, and will not repent, neither will I 
turn back from it. 
foin, p. p. under us; -yn, id. em. 
foyd, p. p. under thee; -s, id. em. 
feue, adv. under you or ye; -ish, id. em. 
feue-hene, pre. under yourselves. 
fo-chlea, adv. under house roof, under 
cover; 1 Sam. xix. 11: Hug Saul myrgeddin 
chaghteryn gys thie Ghavid, dy lhie fo-chlea er 
e hon, as dy varroo eh sy voghrey. Saul also 
sent messengers unto David’s house, to watch 
him, and to slay him in the morning. 
fo-chosh, adv. under foot, beneath, 
overcome; currit fo-chosh (subdued). 
fo-dorrys, s. m. the sole of the door. 
fo-harey, adv. under command. 
fo-e-laue, adv. under his hand, his 
subscription; Isa. xliv. 5: Jir fer, Lesh y 
Chiarn mish; as gowee fer elley ennym Yacob 
er hene; as ver fer elley fo-e-laue gys y Chiarn, 
as sliennooys eh-hene er cowrey Israel. One 
shall say, I am the Lord’s; and another shall call 
himself by the name of Jacob; and another 
shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and 
surname himself by the name of Israel. 
fo-laue-aspick, s. m. confirmation. 
folaue, s. m. a note of hand, a promissory 
note, a certificate or receipt under a 
person’s hand, or from his hand; pl. -yn, or 
foghyn[-]laue. 
fo-my-cheilley, adv. through others, 
subverting; 2 Tim. ii. 14: Jeh ny reddyn shoh 
cur ad ayns cooinaghtyn, coyrt currym orroo 
kiongoyrt rish y Chiarn, nagh streeu ad mysh 
focklyn nagh vel gys veg yn ymmyd, agh dy 
choyrt sleih fo-my-cheilley. Of these things put 
them in remembrance, charging them before 
the Lord that they strive not about words to no 
profit, but to the subverting of the hearers. 
fo-raad, a. under way or weigh. 
fo-yn-eayst, a. sublunary. 
lane fo, s. defiance; v. to defy. 
foadd, v. kindle, light fire; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
my oadd* or oaddys, kindle or ignite, 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; 94. F 
cha voad or voadd*, v. not kindle; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. F 
cha n’oad or n’oadd*, v. 128, not kindle.  
doad, v. 8. kindled, did kindle, lit.  
143 
F 
 
foaddey, v. kindling, lighting fire. 
dy oaddey, to kindle or ignite. F  
er voaddey, v. hath, &c. kindled. F  
er n’oaddey, pt. hath, &c. kindled. F  
foaddit, 85. kindled, lit or lighted. 
s’foaddit, a. how kindled or lighted. F 
ro oaddit, 85. too kindled. F  
foaddan, s. m. a match to kindle fire; pl. 
-yn. 
foaid, s. m. a sod, a clod; pl. -yn. 
e oaid s. his sod; pl. -yn. F  
foain, s. m. the sward, the green grassy 
surface of the earth or ground; fo-ain, 
(under us). 
e oain, s. his sward or grassy surface F  
foal[s]ey, a. false, fictitious, counterfeit, 
unjust, treacherous, perfidious, 
hypocritical. 
s’foalsey, a. how false. F 
s’oalsey, a. how false, comp. and sup. F 
ro oalsey, too false, &c. F  
cassey-foalsey, s. m. a false accuser. 
craueeaght-foalsey, s. hypocrisy, false 
piety. 
crauee-oalsey, s. pl. hypocrites. 
foalsaght or foalsid, falsehood, 
dissimulation; pl. -yn. 
dy oalsaght, s. of falsehood. F  
e oalsid, s. m. his falseness. F  
foalserey, s. 
dty oalserey, s. thy hypocrite or false 
person; Job, [x]i. 3: Vel dty vreagyn dy choyrt 
deiney nyn dhost? as tra t’ou dty oalserey, vel 
dooinney erbee dy chur oo gys nearey? Should 
thy lies make men hold their peace? and when 
thou mockest, shall no man make thee 
ashamed?  
foast, adv. yet, yet still, over and above what 
has been mentioned, besides; -agh, id. em. 
foawr or fowar, s. m. a giant; pl. foawir. 
foawragh, a. gigantic, huge. 
foaynoo, s. m. the condition, state or 
circumstances found in; cren foaynoo t’ort 
(what plight or condition art thou in, or on 
thee). 
dty oaynoo, s. thy condition or plight found 
in. F  
foayr, s. m. favour, kindness; pl. -yn. 
dty oayr, s. thy favour. F  
foayr, v. favour, be kind to; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
cha n’oayr or n’oayree, v. not show 
favour; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. F  
foayral, v. favouring, &c. 
foayraghey 
er n’oayraghey, v. hath, &c. favoured. F  
foayrit, 85. favoured, &c. 
s’foayrit, a. how favoured. F 
foayroil, a. favourable, kind, tender, 
conducive to. 
s’foayroil, a. how favourable. F 
s’foayroiley, a. more favourable, most 
favourable. F 
dy oayroil, adv. favourably. F [should be 
dy foayroil with dy ‘adv.’] 
foayroilid or foayroilys, s. m. 
favourableness, &c. 
foays, s. m. good, goodness, benefit, 
beneficence, perfection; Job. xxviii. 3: T’eh 
soiaghey cagliagh son y dorraghys, as t’eh 
ronsagh magh dy chooilley foays: claghyn y 
dorraghys, as scadoo’n vaaish. He setteth an 
end to darkness, and searcheth out all 
perfection: the stones of darkness, and the 
shadow of death; pl. -yn. 
dy oays, s. of good, of goodness; Deu. x. 
13: Dy reayll annaghyn y Chiarn, as ny 
slattyssyn echey ta mish dy harey dhyt er y laa 
jiu son dty oays hene? To keep the 
commandments of the Lord, and his statutes, 
which I command thee this day for thy good? 
[The quotation does not exactly match the 
entry.] F  
nyn voays, s. your, &c. good or goodness. 
F 
foaysagh, a. good, beneficial, profitable. 
fockl or fockle, s. m. a word; pl. 69 [focklyn]. 
fockle son fockle, adv. word for word, 
verbatim. 
bree-ockle, s. m. a vowel. 
cor[-]ockle, s. m. a consonant; pl. 69 [cor-
ocklyn]. 
fraue-ockle, s. f. etymology. 
fockle, v. word, utter or express; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
144 
F 
 
87; -ys, 88. 
cha n’ockl* or n’ocklee, v. not express in 
words; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym. F  
dockle, v. did word, spoke, or utter; Isa. 
xlviii. 3: Dockle mee magh ro-laue ny reddyn 
va jeant veih’n toshiaght. I have declared the 
former things from the beginning. F  
docklee, v. did speak or utter in words. F  
fockley, v. wording, expressing, uttering 
by words. 
fockley-magh, v. proclaiming, 
promulgating. 
gockley, v. wording, uttering words. F  
er vockley, v. hath, &c. uttered or spoken. 
F  
er n’ockley, v. hath, &c. spoken or 
expressed in words. F  
focklit, 85. worded, uttered, spoke, 
expressed, pronounced. 
s’focklit, a. how worded or spoken. F 
focklagh, a. d. of words, or oral testimony, 
verbal; Isa. xliv. 8: Vel Jee erbee cheu-
mooie jeem’s? dy firrinagh-focklagh, cha vel 
Jee erbee elley dy nhione dooys. Is there a 
God beside me? yea, there is no God; I know 
not any. 
focklagh, a.  
s’focklagh, a. how verbose, loquacious. F 
neu-focklagh, a. in[e]ffable, unspeakable. 
fockleyder, s. m. a person who utters 
words; pl. -yn. 
fockleyr or focklioar, s. m. a dictionary; 
pl. -yn. 
fod or fodd*, v. may, can; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
foddee, v. may or might, can or could. 
foddagh, v. might, could. 
my odd* or oddys, v. if can, canst, could or 
couldst; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms;-ys, 94. 
F  
vod or vodd*, v. can, canst, may, mayst, 
&c.; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. F  
cha nod or nodd*, v. can or canst not; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. F  
dy voddym, p. that I may; -s, id. em. F  
cha voddin, p. I could not; -s, id. em. F 
dy voddagh, v. that could or couldst, &c. F 
cha dod, v. could not; Esther, ix. 2: …as 
cha dod dooinney erbee shassoo roue: son 
huitt yn aggle oc er dy chooilley phobble. …and 
no man could withstand them; for the fear of 
them fell upon all people. F  
my doddin, p. before I could; -s, id. em. F 
foddee, adv. may be, perhaps, 
peradventure. Prov. “Foddee yn moddey 
s’jerree tayrtyn y mwaagh.” [The last dog 
may catch the hare. MWW. The proverb 
belongs rather with foddee, v. above.] 
foddey, adv. far, at a great distance, afar, 
remotely, to great extent; foddey as gerrit 
(far and near), and when applied to time, 
long; as: 
foddey dy hraa, adv. for a long time. 
foddey er dy henney, adv. long since. 
foddey farraghtyn, adv. long lasting. 
cha voddey, [adv.]. not long, not far. F 
foddey, a. remote, distant, foreign. 
s’foddey, a. how far, how long since. 
S’foddey beayn y Ree (long live the King). 
Comp. and sup. See sodjey. F  
dy voddey beayn y ree, long live the king, 
or long may the king live; 2 Kings, xi. 12: 
As hug eh lesh magh mac y ree, as hug eh yn 
crown er, as livrey eh da lioar y leigh: as ren 
ad eh ny ree, as d’ooilee ad eh; as woaill ad 
nyn massyn cooidjagh, as dooyrt ad, Dy 
voddey beayn y ree. And he brought forth the 
king’s son, and put the crown upon him, and 
gave him the testimony; and they made him 
king, and anointed him; and they clapped their 
hands, and said, God save the king. F 
ry-foddey, adv. by a long time. 
surranse-foddey, s. f. long-suffering, 
forbearance. 
sodjey, a. further, furthest, farther, 
farthest; the comp. and sup. of foddey. 
ny-sodjey, adv moreover, furthermore, any 
more, no more, no further.  
foddiaght or foddeeaght, s. longing for, 
earnest desire, continual wish. This word 
seems to convey, that the person or 
creature affected by it is far from home. 
dty oddeeaght, s. thy longing. F  
foddid, s. m. farness, distance. 
dy oddid, s. of farness, remoteness. F  
fodieeaght, s. m. the distance of the 
furthest arrow shot in archery, farness. 
145 
F 
 
foddyr, s. m. fodder. 
foddyr, v. id. -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
foddyrit, 85. foddered, fed. 
foghan, s. m. bruit, the young bud or herbage 
of any thing; pl. -yn. 
foghanagh, a. d. of bruit or bruits. 
foghanit, 85. bruited, budded. 
foill, s. m. a fault, foible, flaw. 
e oil or oill, s. his fault or foible; pl. -jyn. F  
foiljyn, s. pl. faults, foibles. 
nyn voiljyn, s. your, &c. faults. F 
feddyn-foill, v. finding fault, blaming, 
accusing. 
foiljagh, a. faulty, blameable, culpable. 
s’foiljagh, a. how faulty or criminal. F 
s’foiljee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. F 
neu-foiljagh, a. unblameable, faultless; s. 
m. a faultless person; pl. 71 [change -agh to 
-ee]. 
foillan, s. f. a gull; pl. -yn. 
foilliu, s. m. mulcture, toll given at a mill for 
grinding. 
foillycan, s. m. a butterfly; pl. -yn. 
folder or foldyr, s. m. a mower; pl. -yn. 
folderys or foldyrys, s. m. the craft or trade 
of a mower, or of one who cuts with a 
scythe. 
foldyragh, a. d. of a mower or mowers. 
yiarn-foldyragh, s. f. a scythe or sithe. 
foll or follee, v. hide, conceal; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
my oll or ollys, v. if hide; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms, 94. F  
cha n’oll or n’ollee, v. not hide; -agh; -in F  
doll or dollee, v. did hide, hid or concealed. 
F  
follaghey, v. hideing, concealing. 
dy ollaghey, v. to hide, to secrete.  
er vollaghey, v. hath, &c., hid, hidden or 
concealed. F 
er n’ollaghey, v. hath, &c. hid. F  
follaghtyn, v. hideth, &c.; Prov. xix. 24: 
Ta’n litcher liastey follaghtyn e laue ayns e 
vroghil, as s’coan nee eh wheesh troggal eh 
gys e veeal. A slothful man hideth his hand in 
his bosom, and will not so much as bring it to 
his mouth again. 
follit, 85. hid, concealed, secreted. 
s’follit, a. how hid or hidden. F 
follaghtagh, a. clandestine, by stealth. 
folleyder, s. m. a hider, a concealer; pl. -yn. 
folliaght, s. f. secret, mystery, concealment, 
secrecy; pl. -yn. 
follan, a. wholesome, esculent, eatable, hale, 
sound; and when applied to doctrine, 
orthodox, &c. 
s’follan, a. how wholesome, esculent, how 
orthodox, comp. and sup., or s’follaney. F 
neu-follan, a. unwholesome, prejudicial, 
insalubrious, corrupt. 
follanid or follanys, s. m. wholesomeness, 
salubrity, orthodoxy. 
follyd or follick, s. m. dry meal put on a cake 
to bake or clap it out. 
follym, a. empty, having nothing in, vacant. 
s’follym, a. how empty. F 
s’follymey, a. more empty, most empty. F 
folmey, a. pl. empty. Prov. “Siyn folmey 
smoo sheean nee.” [Empty vessels make 
the most sound.] 
follym-faase, a. desolate; Jer. xxv. 38: T’eh 
er jeet magh ass e ooig, myr lion; son ta’n 
cheer oc follym faase, kyndagh rish dewilys yn 
tranlaasagh, as eulys e yymmoose. He hath 
forsaken his covert, as the lion: for their land is 
desolate because of the fierceness of the 
oppressor, and because of his fierce anger; 
Acts. i. [2]0: Son te scruit ayns lioar ny 
psalmyn, Lhig da’n ynnyd-vaghee echey ve 
follym faase, as ny lhig da dooinney erbee 
cummal ayn: as, Yn aspickys echey lhig da fer 
elley y ghoaill. For it is written in the book of 
Psalms, Let his habitation be desolate, and let 
no man dwell therein: and his bishoprick let 
another take. 
folm or folmee, v. empty, discharge; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88. 
my olm or olmee, v. if empty; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms, 94. F  
cha n’olm* or n’olmee, v. not empty; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. F  
dolm or dolmee, v. did empty or emptied. 
F  
folmaghey, v. emptying, disburdening. 
146 
F 
 
golmagh, v. emptieth, &c. F  
golmaghey, v. emptying. F  
dy olmaghey, v. to empty. F  
er volmagh or volmaghey, v. hath, &c. 
emptied. F 
er n’olmagh or n’olmaghey, v. hath, &c. 
emptied. F  
folmit, 85; emptied, discharged. 
s’follymit, a. how emptied. F 
ro olmit, 85. too emptied. F  
folmeyder, s. m. one who empties. 
yn olmeyder, s. m. the emptier. F  
folmid, s. m. emptiness, nothing; Job. xxvi. 
7: T’eh sheeyney magh yn twoaie harrish y 
feaynid vooar, as t’eh cummal seose yn seihll 
er y folmid. He stretcheth out the north over 
the empty place, and hangeth the earth upon 
nothing. 
e olmid, s. his emptiness. F  
folmidys, s. m. vacancy. 
e olmeydys, s. his vacancy. F  
folt, s. m. hair, the hair of a person’s head. 
dty olt, s. the hair of thy head. F  
nyn volt, s. your, &c. hair; Ez. xliv. 20: 
Chamoo nee ad baarey nyn ghing, ny lhiggey 
da nyn volt gaase liauyr, nee ad ynrycan 
baarey nyn volt. Neither shall they shave their 
heads, nor suffer their locks to grow long; they 
shall only poll their heads. F 
far-folt, s. m. false hair, a wig. 
fondagh, a. sufficient, stable, firm, solvent, 
sure, effectual. 
s’fondagh, a. how sufficient, &c. F 
s’fondee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. This 
word ought to be used in Exod. iv. 13 
instead of s’fondagh: As dooyrt eh, O my 
Hiarn, cur dty haghteraght, ta mee guee ort 
liorishyn ta ny fondagh er y hon. And he said, 
O my Lord, send, I pray thee, by the hand of 
him whom thou wilt send. [But in the citation 
fondagh appears in a different construction, 
not as s’fondagh.] F 
neu-fondagh, a. insufficient, incapable, 
insolvent; s. m. an incapable person; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. 
fondid, s. m. sufficiency, solvency, 
stability. 
e ondid, s. his sufficiency. F  
fooillagh, s. m. leavings, remainder, remnant, 
fragment or fragments. Prov. “Ta fooillagh 
naareydagh ny smelley na ee 
scammyltagh.” [Shameful leavings is 
worse than disgraceful eating.] 
e ooilliaght, s. his leavings.  
fooilleyraght, v. fribbling. 
fooilleyrey, s. m. a fribblery. 
fordr or fordree, v. afford; -agh, 77; -in, 83; 
-ym, 86, -ys, 88. 
ford, v. afford; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -ys, 88. 
fordrail, v. affording, sparing. 
er vordrail, v. hath, &c., afforded. F 
fordrit, 85. afforded, spared. 
fort, s. m. ability, able to afford. 
dty ort, s. thy ability. F  
nyn vort, s. your, &c, ability. F 
fortan, s. m. fortune; pl. -yn. 
fortanagh, a. fortunate, lucky. 
fosaid, s. m. a faucet; pl. -yn. 
foshl or foshil, v. open; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84 ; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
my oshl* or oshlys, v. if open; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms, 94. F  
cha voshl or voshil, v. not open; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94 F  
cha n’oshl* or n’oshlee, v. not open. F  
doshill, v. opened, did open. F  
fosley, v. opening; s. m. an opening; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn]. 
dy osley, v. to open, to disclose. F  
er vosley, v. hath, &c., opened. F 
er n’osley, v. hath, &c., opened. F  
foshlit, 85. open, opened. 
s’foshlit, a. how open. F 
feayn-foshlit, a. wide, open. 
fosleyder, s. m. an opener; pl. -yn. 
e osleyder, s. his opener or discloser. F  
foster, s. m. a forester; pl. -yn. 
fosteragh, a. d. of a forester or forestery. 
fosterys, s. m. forestery. 
fou, s. m. a rumour, a report; Ecclesiasticus, 
xxv. 18: Hig fou jeh shoh gys e dooinney, tra 
t’eh soie marish e naboonyn, as ver eh 
osnaghyn tromey er e chree. Her husband shall 
sit among his neighbours; and when he heareth 
it shall sigh bitterly. 
147 
F 
 
foudagh or foudee, a. unsound, morbid, 
damaged. 
foudaghey 
er voudaghey, v. hath, &c., become 
damaged or unsound. F 
e voudeeid, s. his unsoundness. F  
foudid, s. m. unsoundness, damage, 
morbidness. 
fouyr, s. f. harvest, autumn; pl. -yn. 
yn ouyr, s. the harvest; 2 Sam. xxi. 9, 10: 
As livrey eh ad gys laue ny Gibeoniteyn, as ren 
ad croghey ad er y chronk kiongoyrt rish y 
Chiarn: as huitt ooilley’n shiaght cooidjagh, as 
v’ad er nyn goyrt gy-baase ayns laghyn yn 
ouyr, er ny chied laghyn, ayns toshiaght y 
fouyr-oarn. As ghow Rizpah inneen Aiah 
aanrit-sack, as skeayl ee eh er y chreg, veih 
toshiaght yn ouyr derrey huitt fliaghey neose 
orroo veih’n aer, as cha lhig ee da eeanlee’n 
aer dy heet orroo ’sy laa, ny beishtyn y vagher 
’syn oie. And he delivered them into the hands 
of the Gibeonites, and they hanged them in the 
hill before the Lord: and they fell all seven 
together, and were put to death in the days of 
harvest, in the first days, in the beginning of 
barley harvest. And Rizpah the daughter of 
Aiah took sackcloth, and spread it for her upon 
the rock, from the beginning of harvest until 
water dropped upon them out of heaven, and 
suffered neither the birds of the air to rest on 
them by day, nor the beasts of the field by 
night. F  
cormid-traa-fouyr, s. m. the harvest, or 
autumnal equinox. 
re-hollys vooar y n’ouyr, s. f. the great 
harvest moonlight, called so from the 
moon’s rising about or near the same time 
for a week successively, at the time of full, 
caused by the situation of the earth and 
moon at or after the autumnal equinox. 
fouyragh or fouyir, a. d. of or belonging to 
harvest. 
fouyroil, a. congenial or seasonable to the 
harvest. 
fowan, s. m. a dry scorching wind, a blast, a 
blight. 
fowanagh, a. droughty with scorching 
wind, withering. 
s’fowanagh, a. how droughty or scorching 
dry. F 
s’fowanee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. F 
fowanit, 85. blasted, blighted, dried up 
with draughty wind. 
s’fowanit, a. scorched or dried up. F 
foyin, a. fine. This and the two following 
words are, I think, only corruptions of the 
English, but are often used. 
foyiney, a. pl. fine; as, laghyn foyiney (fine 
days). 
foyinid, s. m. finery, fineness. 
foyll, s. m. a dog’s bed, a kennel; a bed in 
contempt. 
foyr, s. m. edge, the edge of a tool or 
instrument. 
foyragh, a. having an edge, sharp-edged. 
s’foyragh or sfoyral, a. how sharp edged. 
F  
s’foyree, a. id., comp. and sup. F 
foyrit, 85. made sharp-edged. 
s’foyrit, a. See shleeut. [‘sharpened, 
whetted’] F 
fragym, a. out of the way of duty, awry. A 
low word. 
franagh 
onnane-franagh, s. f. the down or cotton 
thistle. 
Frangagh, s. m. a Frenchman; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee]; a. any thing French. 
Frangish, s. f. the French language. 
[y] Rank, s. f. France. 
frap, s. m. the sound made by a sudden or 
quick blow, or explosion of air. 
frappal or frapperaght, v. cracking or 
crackling, as thorns in a fire when burning. 
frappagh 
s’frappagh, a. how crackling. F 
s’frappee, a. id., comp. and sup. F 
frass, s. m. a shower; pl. -yn. 
frassagh, a. showery. 
s’frassagh, a. how showery. F 
s’frassee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. F 
fraue, s. [f]. a root; pl. -yn. 
fraue, v. take root; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ys, 88. 
fraueit, 85. grounded, settled by roots in 
the ground. 
148 
F 
 
s’frauit, a. how rooted or grounded. F 
fraue-oaie, s. f. a feature; pl. -yn.  
fraue-ockle, s. f. etymology.  
fraueoil, a. radical; having roots, rooty. 
frauagh 
s’frauagh, a. how rooty or having strong 
roots F 
s’frauee, a. id., comp. and sup. F  
fraueaig, s. f. a small root or fibre; pl. -yn. 
fraueaigagh, a. having small roots, fibrous. 
s’frauaigagh, a. with how many small 
roots. F 
s’frauaigee, a. id., comp. and sup. F 
frea, s. m. some thing given above the 
common or ordinary usage. 
freayn, v. flow or overflow; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
s. m. a flow or flow over; pl. -aghyn. [pl. of 
freayney ?] 
freayney, v. flowing above the surface, 
overflowing; s. m. a flow; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn]. 
s’freaynit, a. how overflowing or flowed 
above the surface. F 
beeal-freayn, adv. (from beeal-freayney) in 
a hasty manner, abruptly. The simile is 
-taken from an animal that is run or 
wrought hard, and foams at the mouth. 
freaynagh, a. raging; Jude, i. 13: Tonnyn 
freaynagh yn aarkey, keshal magh yn nearey 
oc hene; rollageyn rouail, daue ta kiarit yn 
dooid dy ghorraghys son dy bragh. Raging 
waves of the sea, foaming out their own 
shame; wandering stars, to whom is reserved 
the blackness of darkness for ever. 
s’freaynagh, a. how overflowing. F 
s’freaynee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. F 
freeney, s. m. a pin; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
carnane-freeney, s. m. the head of a pin. 
lus ny freenaghyn mooarey, s. f. dove’s 
foot, crane’s bill. 
freggyr, v. reply, answer, do a required act; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
cha reggyr, v. not reply, or not do a 
required act; -agh; -ee; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. F 
dreggyr, v. replied, did reply or answer, did 
respond. F  
freggyrt, v. replying, answering. 
dy reggyrt, v. to reply or do something re-
quired to be done, to response. F 
freggyrit, 85. replied, answered. 
kiaull-reggyrt, s. f. echo. 
freggyrtagh, a. ready to reply or answer; s. 
m. a person ready to reply or answer; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. 
s’freggyrtagh, a. how replicative, or ready 
to do a thing, [responsive]. F  
s’freggyrtee, a. id., comp. and sup. F 
freill, v. keep, preserve; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
88; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
freill-jee, p. keep ye, &c. 
dy vreill oo, that thou keep. This word is 
also spelled reayll and vreayll. F 
my reaillys, v. if keep or if shall or will 
keep; Acts, xv. 29: Shiu dy reayll shiu hene 
veih bee chebbit gys jallooyn, as veih fuill, as 
veih reddyn toghtit as veih maarderys: voue 
shoh my reaillys shiu shiu-hene, nee shiu dy 
mie. That ye abstain from meats offered to 
idols, and from blood, and from things 
strangled, and from fornication: from which if 
ye keep yourselves, ye shall do well. This, 
word is differently written in 1 Kings, ix. 
4: As my nee uss shooyl kiongoyrt rhym myr 
ren David dt’ayr, ayns ônid cree, as ayns 
ynrickys, dy yannoo cordail rish ooilley ny ta 
mee er harey dhyt, as my reayllys oo my 
lattyssyn as my vriwnyssyn:… And if thou wilt 
walk before me, as David thy father walked, in 
integrity of heart, and in uprightness, to do 
according to all that I have commanded thee, 
and wilt keep my statutes and my 
judgments:…. F  
dreill, v. kept, did keep.  
dreayll, v. did keep, kept. See dreill. F  
freayll or freaylley, v. keeping, keepeth, 
&c., preserving, conserving, &c. 
dy reayll* or reaylley, v. to keep, to 
preserve; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 
94. F  
er nyn vreayll, v. hath, &c, been kept; Est. 
ix. 28: As dy beagh ny laghyn shoh er nyn 
vreayll ayns imraa as cooinaghtyn, trooid dy 
chooilley heeloghe. And that these days 
should be remembered and kept throughout 
149 
F 
 
every generation. F  
er vreaylley, v. hath, &c. kept; N[e]h. i. 7: 
Ta shin er ghellal feer vee-viallagh dt’oi as cha 
vel shin er vreaylley ny annaghyn, ny 
slattyssyn, as ny briwnyssyn doardee oo liorish 
dty harvaant Moses. We have dealt very 
corruptly against thee, and have not kept the 
commandments, nor the statutes, nor the 
judgments, which thou commandedst thy 
servant Moses. F  
er vreilley, v. hath, &c. kept. F  
freilt, 85. kept, preserved. 
s’freilt, a. how kept. F 
s’reaylt, a. how kept. R 
ben-reaylt or ben-freaylt, s. f. a midwife, 
a woman to clear or disentangle; from dy 
chur reaghey: or if from freaylt, a woman 
kept for the purpose. 
freaylleyder, s. m. a keeper, a preserver. 
freilleyder, s. m. a keeper. See also 
freaylleyder. 
freoagh, s. m. frankwort, ling, heath, heather; 
Jer. xlviii. 6: Roie-jee er-chea, saue-jee nyn 
mioys, as bee-jee myr y freoagh ayns yn 
aasagh. Flee, save your lives, and be like the 
heath in the wilderness. 
freoaie, a. d. of heather, heath, or ling. 
koinney-fre[o]aie, s. heather ling. 
freoaghagh, a. abounding in heather. 
s’freoaghagh, a. how full of heather. F 
s’freoaghee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. F 
freoaghit 
s’freoaghit, a. how stored in heather. F 
freoaghane, s. f. a ling berry. 
freoaghane-ghorrym, s. f. a bilberry. 
freoaghanagh 
s’freoaghanagh, a. how abundant in 
lingberries. F 
s’freoaghanee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. 
F 
friogan, s. m. a fin, a bristle; offence; pl. -yn. 
frioganagh, a. finny, having bristles; 
offensive, easily offended. 
s’frioganagh, a. how finny, how snappish. 
F 
s’frioganee, a. id., comp. and sup. F 
frioganit 
s’frioganit, a. how finned. F 
frioose, s. m. advertence, heedfulness, 
consideration, attention, respect, esteem, 
importance, value, consequence, moment, 
diligence. 
meerioose, s. f. (from mee[-]frioose), 
inattention, inadvertence, negligence. 
frioosagh, a. advertent, mindful, heedful, 
considerate, attentive, respectful; 
consequential, momentous; adv. 
advertently. 
s’frioosagh, a. how attentive, with how 
much respect or regard. F 
s’frioosee, a. id., comp. and sup. F 
friplas, s. m. a fop, a coxcomb; pl. -yn. 
frit, s. m. a frivol, a trifle; pl. -yn. 
frittagh, a. trifling, unstable, inconstant. 
fritlag, s. f. a rag, a tatter; pl. -yn. 
e ritlag, s. his rag; pl. -yn. F  
guilley-ny-ritlag, s. m. the manifold tripe 
[the omasum or third stomach of a 
ruminant]. 
fritlagh, a. ragged, tattered, torn. 
s’fritlagh, a. how ragged. F 
s’fritlee, a. more ragged, most ragged. F 
fritlid 
e ritlid, s. his raggedness. F 
froaish, s. f. high assuming language of one’s 
self, swash, egotism, brag. 
froaishagh, a. assumptive, assuming, 
braggart, egotic; s. m. a braggart, an egotist; 
pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]. 
froaishid, s. m. braggadocio, assumption. 
frogh, a. dry rotten, not tough. 
s’frogh, a. how dry, rotten. F 
s’froghey, a. id., comp. and sup. F 
froghey, a. pl. dry rotten. 
froghid, s. m. dry rottenness. 
frook, s. m. the flook of an anchor; pl. -yn. 
frough, s. f. fog, mist; pl. -yn. 
froughagh, a. foggy, misty. 
froughid, s. m. fogginess. 
frourt, s. f. a freak. 
frourtagh or frow[a]rtagh, a. freakish, 
froward, peevish, perverse. [Deu. xxxii. 
20:] M’eddin neem’s y hyndaa voue, as heeym 
cre’n erree hig orroo: son sheeloghe feer 
frowartagh ad, cloan nagh vel veg y treisht 
150 
F 
 
orroo. I will hide my face from them, I will see 
what their end shall be: for they are a very 
froward generation, children in whom is no 
faith. 
s’frourt or s’frowartagh, a. how froward, 
peevish, perverse; <Deu. xxxii. 20>. F 
s’frourtee or s’frowartee, a. id., [comp. 
and sup.,] 58. F 
frourtid, s. m. frowardness. 
fud, pre. among, mixed, through, mingled 
with. 
fud-ny-hoie, adv. through the night. 
fud-y-cheilley, adv. mixed through others. 
s’fud y cheilley, a. how much through each 
other, or through others. F 
ny ud, a. among, mixed. F 
ny vud eu, among you; 1 Cor. xi. 30: Son 
yn oyr shoh ta ymmodee annoon as 
doghanagh ny vud eu, as ymmodee nyn 
gadley. For this cause many are weak and 
sickly among you, and many sleep. F 
ny-vud oc, adv. among them, amongst 
them.  
fudagh, a. discreet, decent, grave, modest; 1 
Tim. ii. 9 and iii. 11: Myrgeddin neesht dy 
jean mraane adhene y hoiaghey magh ayns 
coamrey fudagh, lesh ymmyrkey arrymagh, as 
sheeltys: cha nee lesh folt feeit, ny airh, ny 
pearlyn, ny coamrey costal. In like manner also, 
that women adorn themselves in modest 
apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety; 
not with broided hair, or gold, or pearls, or 
costly array. 
Shegin da ny mraane oc myrgeddin ve dy 
ymmyrkey fudagh, cha nee scammyltee, agh 
sheelt, ynrick ayns dy chooilley nhee. Even so 
must their wives be grave, not slanderers, 
sober, faithful in all things. 
neu-fuidagh, a. unbecoming, indecent. 
fudid, s. m. discretion, decency. 
fuill or fuillee, v. permit, allow, &c.; -agh, 
77; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
[cha] n’uill* or n’uillee, v. not suffer or 
permit; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. F 
duillee, v. did suffer, permit, or allow 
something to be done; Luke, xiii. 2: Vel 
shiuish sheiltyn dy row ny Galileanee shoh nyn 
beccee erskyn ooilley ny Galileanee, er-y-fa dy 
duillee ad lheid y baase? Suppose ye that 
these Galilaeans were sinners above all the 
Galilaeans, because they suffered such 
things?; 2 Cor. xi. 25: Three keayrtyn va mee 
custit lesh slattyn, un cheayrt va mee er my 
chlaghey, three keayrtyn duillee mee coayl-
lhuingey oie as laa ta mee er ve ayns y diunid. 
Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I 
stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and 
a day I have been in the deep. F  
fuillagh or fuillaghtyn, v. allowing, 
permitting, suffering to be done, bearing 
with; Heb. ix. 15: As son yn oyr shoh she 
eshyn ta eddyr shin as Jee fo’n conaant noa, 
myr shen liorish fuilliaghtyn baase dy yannoo 
lhiassaghey son ny peccaghyn va fo’n chied 
chonaant, dy voddagh adsyn t’er nyn eam 
geddyn yn gialdynys jeh eiraght dy bragh 
farraghtyn. And for this cause he is the 
mediator of the new testament, that by means 
of death, for the redemption of the 
transgressions that were under the first 
testament, they which are called might receive 
the promise of eternal inheritance. 
er n’uillaghtyn, v. hath, &c. suffered or 
permitted. F  
fuill, s. f. blood; pl. -yn. 
dty uill, s. thy blood. F  
folley or foalley, a. d. of blood or bloody; 
Luke, viii. 43 and 44: As va ben va roie 
foalley er ve eck rish daa vlein jeig, v’er vaarail 
ooilley e cooid-seihlt er fir-lhee, as cha daink eh 
lesh veg jeu ee y lheihys, haink ee shoh cheu e 
chooylloo, as venn ee rish oirr e gharmad: as 
chelleeragh hyrmee yn roie-foalley eck. And a 
woman having an issue of blood twelve years, 
which had spent all her living upon physicians, 
neither could be healed of any, came behind 
him, and touched the border of his garment: 
and immediately her issue of blood stanched. 
giarrey-folley, s. m. the bloody flux. 
fuilliaght, s. m. consanguinity, relationship 
by blood. 
dty uilliaght, s. thy consanguinity or 
relationship by blood. F  
fuilltagh or fuilliaghtagh, a. bloody, eager 
to spill blood; Psl. cxxxix. 19: Nagh jean oo 
stroie ny drogh-yantee, O Yee? immee-jee ass 
m’enish, shiuish gheiney fuilltagh. Wilt thou 
151 
F 
 
not slay the wicked, O God? depart from me, 
ye blood-thirsty men. 
fuinn, v. bake; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
my uinn* or uinnys, v. if bake; -agh; -ee; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms ; -ys, 94. F  
cha n’uinn, or n’uinney, v. bake. F  
duin, or duinn, v. did bake or baked. F  
fuinney, v. baking; s. m. a baking; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn]. 
dy uinney, v. to bake. F  
er n’uinney, v. hath, &c. baked. F  
fuinnee, a. d. of baking. 
ben uinnee, a. d. a bake woman. F 
fuinnit or fuinnt, 85. baked, baken. 
s’fuint or s’fuinnt, a. how baked. F 
ro uinnit, 85. too baked. F 
fuinneyder, s. m. a baker; pl. -yn. 
e uinneyder, s. his baker. F 
fuirr or fuirree, v. stay, tarry, stop; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. 
fuirree-ort, in. hold thee or thou, stay thou 
or thee, stop thou or thee. 
my uirr* or uirrys, v. if stay or tarry; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys. F  
cha vuir or vuirr*, v. not stay; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. F  
cha n’uirr or n’uirree, v. not stay; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. F  
duirr or duirree, v. did stay, staid, did wait 
or tarry. F  
fuirraght or fuirraghtyn, v. staying, 
stopping, tarrying. 
dy uirraght or uirraghtyn, v. to stay or 
tarry. F 
er vuirriaght or vuirraghtyn, v. hath, &c. 
stayed; Acts, xxv. 6: As tra v’eh er vuirriaght 
ny mast’ oc mysh jeih laa, hie eh sheese gys 
Cesarea. And when he had tarried among them 
more than ten days, he went down unto 
Caesarea. F 
er n’uirraghtyn, v. hath, &c. stayed. F  
fuirrit, 85. stayed. Not used. 
fuirreyder, s. m. a stayer, &c. 
dty uirreyder, s. thy stayer. F 
fuirraghtagh 
s’fuirraghtagh, a. how much for staying or 
tarrying. F 
s’fuirraghtee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. 
F 
fuygh, s. m. wood, timber. I think the 
orthography would be better foiee. 
fuyghagh, a. wooden. Obsolete. 
fuight 
s’fuight or s’fuyght, a. how timbered. F 
fy- 
fy-yerrey, adv. lastly, at last, finally, in 
fine. 
fey-yerrey, adv. at last, lastly, finally. See 
also fy. 
fy-yerrey-hoal, adv. at long last, &c. 
fynneraght, s. m. frigidness, coolness, cool 
breeze. 
fynney, s. m. fur, hair, the hair that covers the 
body of an animal. 
fynnagh, a. hairy, having hair. 
fyn-ruy, a. having brown hair or fur. 
fynnit 
s’fynnit, a. how well furred, or grown over 
with hair or fur. F 
fynnican, s. m. the glaire or white of an egg. 
fyrryn, a. he, male, masculine. 
s’fyrryn, a. how he or masculine. F 
Jees yr[r]in, s. two males or he ones [?]; 
Dan. viii. 5: …cur-my-ner, haink goayr-yrryn 
veih’n neear, er feaï-ny-cruinney, as s’coan 
venn eh rish y thalloo: as va eairk chronnal ec y 
ghoayr, eddyr e hooillyn. …behold, an he goat 
came from the west on the face of the whole 
earth, and touched not the ground. F 
fyrrynagh, s. m. one of the male sex, one 
of the masculine gender; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee]. 
fyrrynid, s. m. masculineness. 
e yrrynid, s. his he-ness, masculineness. F  
fys, s. m. knowledge, knowing; as, ta fys aym 
(I have knowledge or I know); hug eh fys 
hym (he sent or gave me knowledge or let 
me know). 
gyn-yss, a. unknown, without knowledge 
of. 
cha s’echey, p. he does not know; -syn, id. 
em. E  
cha s’ec, p. she does not know; -ish, id. em. 
E  
cha saec, p. p. she does not know; -ish, id. 
152 
F 
 
em. This word ought to end with k, as eck, 
and not ec (at).  
cha s’oc, p. they do not know; -syn, id. em. 
O 
cha s’aym, p. I do not know, I know not; 
John ix. 12: Eisht dooyrt ad rish, Cre vel eh? 
Dooyrt eshyn, Cha s’aym. Then said they unto 
him, Where is he? He said, I know not; -s, id. 
em. 
cha s’ain, p. we know not; -yn, id. em. A  
cha s’ayd, p. thou dost not know; -s, id. em.  
cha s’eu, p. ye or you know not; -ish, id. 
em. E 
cha saeu, p. p. ye or you do not know; -ish, 
id. em. 
fyssyree, s. f. foreknowledge, prescience, 
anticipated knowledge of what is to come 
to pass. 
yn ysseree, s. the knowledge, the fore 
knowledge; Luke, xi. 52: Smerg diu fir-ynsee 
yn leigh: son ta shiu er ghoaill ersooyl ogher yn 
ysseree: cha jagh shiu stiagh shiu hene, as 
adsyn va goll stiagh, ren shiu y lhiettal. Woe 
unto you, lawyers! for ye have taken away the 
key of knowledge: ye entered not in yourselves, 
and them that were entering in ye hindered. F 
fir-yssyree, s. pl. astrologers; Isa. xlvii. 13: 
Lhig da nish ny fir-yssyree, ny rollageydee, as 
ny fallogyssee meeagh, shassoo seose as 
sauail oo veih shen ta kiarit dy heet ort. Let now 
the astrologers, the stargazers, the monthly 
prognosticators, stand up, and save thee from 
these things that shall come upon thee. 
kevys, adv. (a corruption of cre fys or 
cre’n-fys) what knowledge or knowing [?]. 
Though I do not wish to support 
corruptions, yet, this word being so often 
used in this form in the language it may not 
be amiss to take notice of it.  
kevys da, adv. how does he know [?]; -syn, 
id. em.  
kevys jee, adv. how do[es] she know [?]; 
-ish, id. em.  
kevys daue, adv. how do they know [?]; 
-syn, id. em.  
kevys dou, adv. how do I know [?]. 
kevys dooys, adv. the emphatic of dou.  
kevys dhyt, adv. how does thou know [?]; 
-s, id. em.  
153 
G 
 
G 
G, for its sound, see Remarks 12 and 13, and 
its changes, see 49; it is an initial as shown 
in 43, 45, 46, 51, 54, and 61. S, when 
changed to c, changes also to g, by placing 
nyn before it.  
ga, conj. though, although.  
gaaig, s. f. a crack or chaft; pl. -yn. 
gaaig, v. id., -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88  
gaaigey or gaagey, v. cracking, chaffing; 
Jer. xiv. <1>4: Er-yn-oyr dy vel y thalloo 
gaagey, gyn fliaghey er yn ooir, va ny errooyn 
ass cree, choodee ad nyn ghing. Because the 
ground is chapt, for there was no rain in the 
earth, the plowmen were ashamed, they 
covered their heads.  
gaaigit, 85. cracked, chaft. 
s’gaaigit, a. how cracked or chafed. G 
gaaigagh, a. having cracks or chaffs.  
s’gaaigagh, a. how full of cracks or chafts. 
[G] 
s’gaaigee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. G 
gaaillagh, s. f. a disease in the mouths of 
cattle.  
gaaue, s. m. a smith; pl. -nyn.  
gaaue-doo, s. m. a blacksmith.  
gaauenys, s. m. smithery, smith craft.  
gaidee, s. f. one that is jolly, frisky, or 
wanton.  
y ghaddee myr t[’]ou, s. m. f. a wanton as 
thou art. G  
gadyree or gadyrey, a. jolly, hot, &c.; a 
bitch is said to be so when she wants the 
male.  
Gaelic, Gailic, or Gaelg; s. f. Erse or Manks.  
Gaelgagh, a. Manks or Erse, exclusively 
applied to the languages. 
s’Gaelligagh, a. how much for Manks or 
Erse. G 
s’Gaelligee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. G 
gaer, s. m. short dung, ordure.  
gah, s. m. a sting; pl. -yn.  
gahagh, a. having a sting, venomous.  
e ghah, s. his sting. G  
gaghey, v. stinging, stingeth, &c. [Pro. 
xxiii. 32.: Ec y jerrey nee eh lhottey myr ard-
nieu, as gaghey goll-rish adder. At the last it 
biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an 
adder.] 
gaid, s. m. a heath or heather rope; pl. -yn. 
gaid, v. -agh, &c.  
gaidey, v. roping with heath rope.  
gaidit. 85. roped with heather ropes.  
gaih, s. m. a toy; pl. -aghyn, or casting the 
final h away [i.e. gaiaghyn]. 
e ghaih, s. his toy or gewgaw; pl. -aghyn. 
G  
gaihagh, a. toyish.  
gailley, s. m. the gizzard or stomach.  
e ghailley, s. his gizzard; pl. 67 [change -ey 
to -aghyn]. G  
gailley-pern, s. m. a fish which I do not 
know the English name of [anglerfish, 
devilfish, frogfish].  
fed-gailley, s. m. the gurgle in the belly of a 
horse when rode hard. 
gorley-gailley, s. the colic or belly ache. 
gall, s. f. gall; the same written as in English, 
but the English is sounded gawl; pl. -yn.  
gall-verg, s. f. bitter spite, or fury 
accompanied with revenge.  
gall-vergagh, a. spiteful to an extreme, 
most ferocious.  
gallagh 
s’gallagh, a. how gusty. G 
s’gallee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. G 
gallar, s. m. a disease, of the same meaning 
with gorley, which see.  
gall-chreeagh, s. f. or it may be goal-
chreeagh, the ending furrow.  
gamley, v. speaking ironically.  
gamman, s. m. game, sport; Jud. xvi. 27: …as 
va er mullagh y thie mysh three thousaneyn dy 
gheiney as mraane, va jeeaghyn er Samson, 
tra v’ad jannoo gamman jeh. …and there were 
upon the roof about three thousand men and 
women, that beheld while Samson made sport; 
pl. -yn.  
e ghamman, s. his game. G  
gammanagh, a. full of game or sport.  
s’gammanagh, a. how gamesome. G 
s’gammanee, a. id., comp. and sup. G 
154 
G 
 
ganglanys, v. jangling, bickering, &c.  
ganglanagh 
s’ganglanagh, a. how much for jangling. G 
s’ganglanee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. G 
gannidagh or gannider, s. m. a mocker or 
derider.  
s’g<h>annidagh, a. how derisory or 
derisive. G 
s’g<h>annidee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 
58. G 
e ghannidagh, s. his despiser, scorner; pl. 
71 [change -agh to -ee]; Acts, xiii. 41: Cur-
jee my-ner, shiuish ghannidee, gow-jee yindys, 
as jean-jee cherraghtyn. Behold, ye despisers, 
and wonder, and perish. G  
gannidys, s. m. mockery, scorn, derision. 
[Heb. x. 33: Ayns ayrn tra va shiu soit magh 
son shilley dy ghannidys daue, chammah 
liorish oltooanyn as seaghyn… Partly, whilst ye 
were made a gazingstock both by reproaches 
and afflictions….] 
e ghannidys, s. his mockery, scoffing. 
gannidys, v. <his> despising, scorning, 
&c.; G  
gard, s. m. guard; 2 Chron. xii. 11: As tra hie 
yn ree gys thie yn Chiarn haink y gard dy 
ghoaill ad, as hug ad lhieu ad reesht gys 
shamyr y ghard. And when the king entered 
into the house of the Lord, the guard came and 
fetched them, and brought them again into the 
guard chamber. 
e ghard, s. his guard. G  
gard, v. guard; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha ghard, v. did or didst not guard; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94 G  
gardey, v. guarding, protecting.  
gardit, 85. guarded, protected.  
s’gardit, a. how guarded. G 
ro ghardit, 85. too well guarded. G  
gardar, s. m. a very strong gust of wind; pl. 
-yn.  
yn gharder, s. the violent gust of wind. G  
garee-breck, s. f. the bird sea-pie.  
garey, s. m. a garden; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
e gharey, s. his garden. G  
kiebbey garey, s. m. a garden spade. 
garagh 
gharagh, a. d. of a garden or gardens. G  
gareyder, s. m. a gardener; pl. -yn.  
gareydys, s. m. gardening.  
e ghareydys, s. his gardening. G  
garg, a. acrid, hot and bitter.  
gargey, a. pl. acrid, hot and bitter.  
s’garg, a. how acrid, comp. and sup. G 
gargagh, v. making acrid or tart.  
gargagh, a. 
s’gargagh, a. how acrimonious. G 
s’gargee, a. id., comp. and sup. G 
gargid or gargys, s. m. acritude, tartness.  
garleid, s. f. garlic; pl. -yn. 
garmad, s. garment; pl. -yn.  
e gharmad, s. his garment. G  
garmin, s. m. a weaver’s beam that the warp 
is rolled on in weaving; pl. -yn.  
garrad, s. m. garret; pl. -yn. 
garran, s. m. a galloway, a pony; pl. -yn.  
e gharran, s. his galloway or pony; pl. -yn. 
Prov. “Eshyn nagh bee mie rish e gharran, 
shegin da’n phollan, y chur lesh er e vuin.” 
[He who will not be good to his pony must 
bring the saddle cloth on his back.] G  
garrey, s. m. a heat, turn, or spell of work.  
garraghyn, s. pl. heats, or spells, or turns 
of work; the pl. of garrey. C.  
e gharrey, s. his heat or spell of work; pl. 
67 [change -ey to -aghyn]. G  
garroo, a. coarse, rugged, uneven, not fine.  
s’garroo, a. how coarse or rough. G 
s’girroo, a. coarser, coarsest, comp. and 
sup. of garroo. G 
ro gharroo, a. too coarse or rough. G  
geinnagh-gharroo, s. f. gravel, coarse 
sand. 
garrooid or gerrooid, s. m. roughness, 
unevenness.  
gart, s. m. the last reaper on the standing corn 
side of a company of reapers in a field.  
gartlhan, v. weeding corn, &c.  
garvain or garveinn, s. groats.  
garveigagh or garveighey, v. roaring, 
bellowing as a lion or bull, &c.  
e gharveigagh, v. his howling, roaring, or 
yelling. G  
155 
G 
 
garvroie, a. parboiled. This word may be 
from garrey dy vroie or from giare vroie.  
gaskeydagh, a. hasty; Hab. i. 6: Son cur-my-
ner, nee’m greinnaghey seose ny Caldeanee, 
yn ashoon elgyssagh shen as gaskeydagh, 
nee marchal trooid lheead y cheer, dy ghoaill 
daue hene cummallyn, nagh vel nyn eiraght. 
For, lo, I raise up the Chaldeans, that bitter and 
hasty nation, which shall march through the 
breadth of the land, to possess the 
dwellingplaces that are not theirs; s. m. a 
person who can work with despatch; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
gass 
gish, s. pl. stems, stalks; Josh. ii. 6: Agh va 
ish er choyrt lh’ee ad seose gys mullagh y thie, 
as er vollaghey ad lesh gish dy lieen, v’ee er 
chiartaghey er mullagh y thie. But she had 
brought them up to the roof of the house, and 
hid them with the stalks of flax, which she had 
laid in order upon the roof.  
gast, 85. chaffed, deased, the skin rubbed off 
by running, walking, or riding.  
gastey or gastagh, a. agile, nimble, clever, 
expert; Jer. l. 9: …bee ny sideyn oc myr 
sideyn dooinney lajer gastey; cha bee side jeu 
lhiggit ayns fardail. …their arrows shall be as of 
a mighty expert man; none shall return in vain.  
s’gastey, a. how agile or nimble, comp. and 
sup. G 
feer ghastey, a. very agile or nimble. G  
gastid, s. m. agility, cleverness.  
gaue, s. m. hazard, risk, peril; pl. -yn.  
gaueagh, a. hazardous, perilous.  
s’gaueagh, a. how hazardous. G 
s’gauee, a. id., comp. and sup. G 
gaueid, s. m. perilousness.  
gauin, s. m. a young beast of the cow kind, 
between the age of a calf and a heifer.  
gouney, s. pl. young cattle, between calves 
and heifers; the pl. of gauin. 
gounagh, s. f. a cow is so called, strictly 
speaking, on being a quarter of a year done 
calving; a stripper; pl. 72 [change -agh to 
-eeyn].  
gounee, a. d. of a stripper or strippers.   
gear, v. laugh; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -ey, 82; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
garaghtee, v. laughing.  
gearit er. 85. laughed at or on.  
geareyder, s. m. a laugher; pl. -yn.  
geay, s. f. wind; pl. -ghyn.  
y gheay, s. the wind; pl. -ghyn. Prov. “Cha 
daink lesh y gheay, nagh ragh lesh yn 
ushtey.” [Nothing came with the wind but 
what would go with the water.] G  
geayee, a. d. of the wind, or of wind.  
bun-ny-geayee, s. the wind’s eye, where 
the wind blows from. 
gollan-geayee, s. a swallow; pl. gollanyn-
geayee. Prov. “Cha jean un ghollan-
geayee sourey, ny un chellagh keylley 
geurey.” [One swallow will not make a 
summer, nor one woodcock a winter.] 
lus ny geayee, s. f. ane[m]o[n]e. 
geayeeagh, a. windy, flatulent.  
s’geayeeagh, a. how windy. G 
s’geayee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. G 
geayeeid, s. m. windiness, flatuosity.  
geayl, s. m. coals; pl. -yn.  
geayil, a. d. of or belonging to coals. 
geaylin, s. f. a shoulder; pl. geayltyn.  
e gheayllin, s. his shoulder. G  
e gheayltyn, s. his shoulders. G  
geayney, a. green.  
s’geayney, a. how green, comp. and sup. G 
geaynid, s. m. greenness.  
geaynaghey, v. making green.  
geaysh, s. f. long strong hair, as the hair of a 
horse’s tail or mane.  
geayshteen, s. f. long strong hairs in wool.  
geyshteen. See geayshteen.  
geayshteenagh, a. hairy, having strong 
hairs.  
geyshteenagh, a. hairy; Gen. xxvii. 23: As 
cha dug eh enney er, er-yn-oyr dy row e laueyn 
geyshteenagh, myr laueyn e vraar Esau. And 
he discerned him not, because his hands were 
hairy, as his brother Esau’s hands.  
geayshteenid, s. m. hairiness.  
geddyn, v. getting, procuring.  
ry gheddyn, v. to be had, to be got, or 
found. G  
dy gheddyn, v. to get, procure, or find. G  
er n’gheddyn, pt. hath, &c. got or gotten. 
G  
156 
G 
 
feddyn, v. finding, acquiring, obtaining. 
feddyn magh, v. finding out, discovering. 
feddynit, found, gotten, acquired. 
feddynit magh, 85. found out, ascertained, 
discovered. 
feddyn-foill, v. finding fault, blaming, 
accusing. 
fow, v. get, procure; fow aarloo (prepare); 
fow dou eh (get it for me). For the relatives 
of this irregular verb, see 62. 
cha vow, p. 144. not get. G  
yiow, p. wilt get, thou wilt get; -s, id. em.  
yiow [ad], p. they will get; -syn, id. em. 
yioym or yoym, p. I will get or have; -s, id. 
em.  
vowym or vo’ym, p. 144. will I get. G 
my vowym or vo’ym baase, before I die. G  
vowyms or vo’yms, p. will I get; em. G 
vow, p. 144. will thou get; -s, id. em. G  
vow ad, will they get; -syn, id. em. G  
now, p. wilt thou get. Y  
now or nowys. A contraction of now uss, 
wilt thou get; em.  
now, p. will they, you &c. get. Y  
cha noghe, v. not get or would not get. Y  
yo’in, I would get or have; -s, id. em. 
yion, p. I would get or have. G  
voghe, v. would get. 
cha voghe, v. would not get. 
vo’in, p. (from voghin) would I get; -s, id. 
em. 
no’in, p. would I get; -s, id. em.  
nowin. See no’in; -s, id. em.  
hooar, v. got, received. This is an irregular 
derivation of the verb geddyn. See 62. G  
dooar ad, v. did they get, or got they[?]. G 
geal. See geeal [deest].  
geid, v. steal, thieve, stealing, thieving; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
gheid, v. did steal, stole; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. G  
geideyder, s. m. a stealer. See maarliagh, 
for thief.  
geidit, 85. stole, stolen.  
geill, s. m. a spring of water; [Jas. iii. 11: Vel 
farrane cur magh ass yn un gheill ushtey 
millish as sharroo? Doth a fountain send forth 
at the same place sweet water and bitter?] 
geill, v. spring; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -it, 85; 
-ys, 88.  
gheill, v. did spring; <Jas. iii. 11.> [see 
citation above, s.v. geill, s. m.] -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. G  
geill, s. m. heed, notice.  
gell. See geill.  
geinnagh, s. f. sand; pl. 72 [change -agh to 
-eeyn].  
sy gheinnagh, s. in the sand. G  
geinnagh-gharroo, s. f. gravel, coarse 
sand.  
geinnee, a. d. of sand.  
geirr, s. f. tallow, suet.  
geirr-vill, s. f. bees’ wax, honey wax.  
geirr, v. <crowed, did crow.> [sc. crow] 
gheir, v. did crow; -agh; -ee; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. G  
gherr, v. did crow, crew; Mark, xiv. 68: 
Agh dob eh, gra, Cha vel fys ny toiggal aym, 
cre t’ou dy ghra. As hie eh magh ayns y 
phorch; as gherr y kellagh. But he denied, 
saying, I know not, neither understand I what 
thou sayest. And he went out into the porch; 
and the cock crew; -agh; -ee; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. G  
geirrym, v. crowing.  
gerrym, v. crowing. See also geirrym.  
er gherrym, v. hath, &c. crowed or crew. G  
gerjagh, s. m. comfort, consolation, 
happiness. That this word is derived from 
ard or yr in yrjid or yrjaghey, I have not the 
least doubt, and of that class of words 
spoken of in the 61st Remark; so comfort 
raises and alleviates the heart to whom 
administered. It is rather of a higher 
meaning than the English, as it is very 
seldom used temporally; for which see 
souirid and souir.  
e gherjagh, s. his comfort. G  
gerjee 
fer-g<h>erjee or fer-ny-g<h>erjagh, s. m. 
a comforter, a consolator, or consoler; pl. 
fir-gherjee, s. pl. comforters, consolers. 
gerjee or gerj*, v. comfort, console; -agh, 
77; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88.  
gherjee, v. did comfort, comforted. G  
157 
G 
 
gerjaghey, v. comforting, consoling, &c.  
dy gherjaghey, v. to comfort, to console. G  
gerjit, 85. comforted, consoled.  
gerjeyder, s. m. a comforter or consoler; pl. 
-yn.  
yn gherjeyder, s. the comforter. G  
gerjoil or gerjoilagh, a. comfortable, 
consolatory, joyful, happy.  
s’gerjoilagh, a. how comfortable. G 
s’gerjoilee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. G 
feer gherjoil or gherjoilagh, a. very 
comfortable, joyful, happy. G  
gerjoilid or gerjoil<l>ys, s. m. 
comfortableness, &c.  
gerrey 
er-gerrey, a. nigh, at hand, at a short 
distance, near. 
gerrid or gerrit, adv. shortly, soon.  
s’gerrid or s’gerrit, a. how shortly. G 
s’gerjey, a. id., comp. and sup. G 
gerrid or gerrit, s. 
yn gherrid or gherrit, s. the short time. G  
er-y-gherrit, adv. lately, shortly. 
aa-gherrit or aagherrid, s. m. a shorter 
way, a shorter cut; pl. -yn. 
geu, s. a gibstaff, a setting pole.  
geuagh, a. forked, branchy.  
geul, v. gyve, fetter, bind, shackle; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
g<h>eul* or g<h>euley, v. to gyve or 
fetter; -agh; -ee; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 
94. G  
geulit, 85. fettered, gyved.  
s’geulit, a. how bound with shackles. G 
geuley, s. m. a gyve, a fetter; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn].  
e gheul or gheuley, s. his gyve or fetter. 
geuleydagh, s. m. one who is bound; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]; Isa. lxi. 1: T’eh er my 
choyrt dy lheihys ny creeaghyn brisht, dy 
ockley-magh reamys da ny cappee, as fosley’n 
phryssoon da ny geuleydee. He hath sent me 
to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim 
liberty to the captives, and the opening of the 
prison to them that are bound. 
geuleyder, s. m. one who fetters or binds.  
geurey, s. m. winter. Probably from the trees 
then being bare as poles; pl. 67 [change -ey 
to -aghyn]. See geu.  
yn gheurey, s. the winter. G  
e yeurey, s. his winter. G 
doo-gheurey, s. m. the dead of winter. 
geuree, a. d. of winter.  
oie gheuree, a. d. the winter’s night. G  
geuragh 
s’geuragh, a. how winterly. G 
s’geuree, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. G 
gew, s. f. a severe pain.  
lus y ghew, s. f. purging flax. 
gewagh, a. painful.  
s’gewagh, a. with what acheing. G 
s’gewee, a. id., comp. and sup. G 
gha, adv. not. In all probability, from cha; as, 
my va dy gha (if it were or not). The sound 
of the gh is not in the English language, as 
shown in Remark 13. 
ghaw, s. f. a creek or cove; pl. -ghyn.  
giau or giaw, s. f. a creek. See ghaw.  
e yaw, a. his creek. G 
gial, s. white, glittering, bright.  
s’gial, a. how bright, glittering or white. G 
s’gilley, a. brighter, brightest; whiter, 
whitest; the comp. and sup. of gial. G 
feer ghial, a. very white or bright. G  
feer yial, a. very glittering, bright, or white. 
G  
gialley, a. pl. white, bright, or glittering.  
yialley, a. pl. white, bright, &c. G  
giall or giallee, v. whiten, or make white or 
bright, bleach or full; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
ghiall or ghiallee, v. did bleach, cleanse, or 
full. G  
yial or yiallee, a. did bleach, whiten, or 
make bright; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; 
-ys, 94. G 
giallaghey, v. whitening, bleaching, fulling.  
er ghiallagh or ghi[a]llaghey, v. hath, &c. 
bleached, made bright or white. G  
giallit, 85. bleached, whitened, fulled.  
s’giallit, a. bleached, whitened, or 
brightened. G 
ro ghiallit, 85. too bleached. G  
ro yiallit, a. too bleached or whitened. G  
giallee, a. d. of whitening, or bleaching.  
158 
G 
 
yiallee, a. d. of whitening, brightening, &c. 
G  
ben ghiallee, a. d. a bleach-woman. G  
gialleyder, s. m. & bleacher, a fuller, one 
that whitens.  
yn ghialleyder, s. the fuller or bleacher. G  
yn yialleyder, s. the bleacher or fuller. G 
gillid, s. m. brightness, whiteness.  
giall, v. promise, grant; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
ghiall, v. did promise or grant; -agh; -ee; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. G  
yial or yiall, v. did promise or grant; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. G  
gialdin, v. promising, granting. 
g<h>ialtaghey, v. granting, promising, 
pledging. Matrimonial Service.  
er ghialdyn, v. hath, &c. promised or 
granted. G  
er n’ghialdyn, pt. hath, &c. promised.  
er yialdyn, v. hath, &c. promised, granted. 
G 
er n’ghialtaghey, pt. hath, &c. granted. G  
giallit, 85. promised, granted.  
s’giallit, a. how promised, granted. G 
ro ghiallit, 85. too promised or granted. G  
ro yiallit, a. too promised or granted. G 
gialdin or gialdynys, s. m. a promise, a 
grant; pl. -yn.  
e yialdynys, s. his promise, grant, &c. G  
dty ghialdinyn, s. pl. thy promises or 
grants. G  
gialleyder, s. m. one that promises or 
grants.  
yn yialleyder, s. the promiser or granter. G 
gialtagh, s. m. a gallant; pl. 71 [change -agh 
to -ee].  
e gh[i]altagh, s. his gallant. G  
gialteeys, s. m. gallantry.  
giare, a. short, momentary, brief, not long.  
s’giare a. how short, or short it is. Prov. 
“S’giare y jough na yn skeeal.” [Shorter is 
the drink than the story.] G  
s’girrey, a. shorter, shortest, comp. and 
sup. of giare. G 
feer yiare, a. very short. G  
ro ghiare, a. too short. See yiare. G  
ro yiare, a. too short. G 
giare-chooat, s. m. a jacket.  
yn ghiare-veinn, s. the groats. G  
yn yiare-choonlagh, s. the stubble; Isa. 
[xl]vii. 14: Cur-my-ner, bee ad myr y yiare-
choonlagh; nee yn aile ad y lostey. Behold, 
they shall be as stubble; the fire shall burn 
them. G  
giarey, a. pl. short, brief.  
yiarey, a. pl. short. G 
giarrey, a. pl. short; as, deiney giarrey 
(short men).  
ghiarrey, a. pl. short.  
girraghey, v. shortening, abridging.  
er ghirraghey, v. hath, &c. shortened, or 
abridged, abbreviated. G  
girrid, s. shortness, brevity.  
e ghirrid, s. his shortness. G  
e yirrid, s. his shortness. <J>[G] 
giar, v. cut, hew; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
ghiar or ghiare, did cut. See yiare. G  
yiare or yiarr*, v. did cut; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. G 
giarey, v. cut; Exod. xxxiv. 13:  
Agh nee shiu stroie ny altaryn oc, brishey ny 
jallooyn, as giarey sheese ny biljyn foue v’ad 
coyrt ooashley. But ye shall destroy their altars, 
break their images, and cut down their groves.  
giarrey, v. cutting, hewing, &c.  
dy ghiarey, v. to cut; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. G  
dy yiarey, v. to cut. G 
giarrey magh, v. excluding, cutting out.  
dy yiarey-seose, v. to carve or cut up meat. 
G 
giarit, 85. cut, shortened; Exod. xxxii. 16: 
As va ny buird obbyr Yee, as va’n scrieu, jeant 
liorish Jee, giarit ayns ny buird. And the tables 
were the work of God, and the writing was the 
writing of God, graven upon the tables.  
giarrit, 85. cut, hewn.  
ro yiarrit, a. too cut. G 
anghiarit, uncut, unhewn; 85. 
giarreyder, s. m. a cutter; pl. -yn.  
yn ghiareyder, s. the cutter; pl. -yn. G  
e yiareyder, s. his cutter. G  
giarrey, s. m. a cut; the flux; an edge; pl. 
<71> [? 67 change -ey to -aghyn]. 
giarrey-folley, s. m. the bloody flux. 
yn yiarrey-folley, s. the bloody flux. 
159 
G 
 
giarey-çhymmylt ‘circumcision’ 
anghiarey-çhymmylt, s. m. 
uncircumcision. 
giastyllagh, a. charitable, liberal, bountiful.  
s’giastylagh, a. how charitable or 
generous. G 
s’giastylee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. G 
ro ghiastyllagh, a. too liberal, charitable, 
or bountiful. G  
ro yiastylagh, a. too charitable or liberal. G 
giastyllid, s. m. charitableness.  
e ghiastyllid, s. his charitableness. G  
giastyllys, [s.] charity, bounty, liberality, 
generosity.  
e ghiastyllys, s. his charity, bounty, &c. G  
e yiastylys, s. his charity, liberality, or 
bounty. G 
giat, s. m. a gate, a field; [pl. -tyn].  
dty ghiat, s. thy gate. G  
e yiat, s. his gate; pl. -tyn. G 
giattey, a. d. of a gate or gates.  
gibbagh, a. pointed, sharp pointed. 
s’gibbagh, a. how sharp or pointed. G 
s’gibbee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. G 
ro ghibbagh, a. too sharp pointed. G  
feer yibbagh, a. very pointed, sharp, &c. G 
gibbee[-]chiu or gibbee[-]chiow, s. f. a 
chilblain, a kibe; pl. -yn.  
yn ghibbee[-]chiu, s. the kibe; pl. -yn. G  
e yibbee[-]hiu, a. his chilblain. G 
gien or giens, s. m. a feast or gala; 2 Peter. ii. 
13: She spooit ad as lheamyssyn, cloie rish y 
volteyraght oc hene, choud’s t’ad ec gien 
mêriu. Spots they are and blemishes, sporting 
themselves with their own deceivings while 
they feast with you. Prov. “Gien nonney 
gortey.” [Either a feast or a famine.] 
gien, s. m. cheer, festivity; temper of mind.  
gen, s. cheer. See gien.  
yn ghien mie, s. the good cheer. G  
e yien, a. his cheer; drogh yien (sad); Gen. 
xl. 6: As haink Joseph stiagh huc ’sy voghrey, 
as yeeagh eh orroo, as cur-my-ner, va drogh 
yien orroo. And Joseph came in unto them in 
the morning, and looked upon them, and, 
behold, they were sad. G 
gen-eddin, s. m. countenance.  
gennal, a. cheerful, affable, jovial, having 
sweet engaging looks.  
s’gennal, a. how cheerful, free, affable, 
glad, merry, comp. and sup. G 
ben ghennal, a. a cheerful woman. G  
feer yennal, a. very glad, cheerful, free. G 
anghennal, a. cheerless, sad. 
gennallys, s. cheerfulness, exhilaration, 
hilarity, mirth, affability, jocularity.  
dy yennallys, s. of joyfulness, gladness. G 
e ghennallys, s. his cheerfulness, his 
kindness. G  
e yennallys, s. his cheerfulness, &c. G 
anghennallys, s. m. infestivity. 
ard-ghennallys, s. m. great gladness. 
gient, v. conceive, or become pregnant; form 
in the mind.  
ghient, v. did conceive; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94.  
yient, v. did conceive or conceived; -agh; 
&c. -ys. G 
gientyn, v. conceiving; Gen. xxx. 38: As 
hoie eh ny slattyn v’eh er speeiney, kiongoyrt 
rish ny shioltaneyn ayns ny jeeigyn, liorish ny 
troghyn ushtey, tra haink ny shioltaneyn dy iu; 
dy voddagh ad gientyn, tra harragh ad gys yn 
ushtey. And he set the rods which he had pilled 
before the flocks in the gutters in the watering 
troughs when the flocks came to drink, that 
they should conceive when they came to drink. 
See also giennaghtyn.  
dy ghientyn, v. to conceive. G  
dy yientyn, v. to conceive. G 
er ny yientyn, adv. having been conceived, 
conceived.  
giennaghtyn, v. conceiving, generating; 
Luke, i. 31: As cur-my-ner, nee oo 
giennaghtyn, as mac y ymmyrkey, as 
enmyssee oo yn ennym echey Yeesey. And, 
behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and 
bring forth a son, and shalt call his name Jesus.  
er ghien[n]aghtyn, v. hath, &c. conceived. 
G  
er yiennaghtyn, v. hath, &c. conceived, 
&c. G  
gientit, 85. conceived, formed in the womb 
or mind.  
s’gientit, a. how conceived. G 
ro yientit, a. too conceived, &c. G 
giennaghtyn reesht spyrrydoil, s. spiritual 
160 
G 
 
birth, regeneration.  
aa-ghiennaghtyn, s. m. regeneration. 
gigleragh, v. gig[g]ling, tittering.  
dy yigleragh, v. to giggle. G 
giglerys, s. m. gig[g]ling.  
gimlad, s. a wimble or gimlet.  
e ghimlad, s. his wimble. G  
gimmagh, s. m. a lobster; pl. 71 [change -agh 
to -ee].  
e ghimmagh, s. his lobster; pl. 71. G  
e yimmagh, s. his lobster. G 
gimman 
ghimman, s. m. an admirer, a suiter or 
lover; pl. -yn; Ezk. xvi. 33: T’ad cur faill da 
streebeeyn elley, agh t’ou uss stowal dty 
yiootyn da ooilley dty ghimmanyn, as failley 
ad dy heet hood veih dy chooilley ard, son dty 
vaarderys. They give gifts to all whores: but 
thou givest thy gifts to all thy lovers, and hirest 
them, that they may come unto thee on every 
side for thy whoredom. 
gliminagh, s. m. a sweetheart, a lover.  
gioal, s. m. pledge, pawn, mortgage, security.  
e ghioal, s. his pledge, pawn, or mortgage; 
pl. -yn. G  
e yioal, s. his pawn, pledge, or mortgage. G 
gioaldee, a. d. of pledge, pawn, or 
mortgage; Amos, ii. 8: As t’ad hene lhie 
sheese er eaddagh gioaldee, liorish dagh altar. 
And they lay themselves down upon clothes 
laid to pledge by every altar.  
pooar-gioal, s. m. an execution.  
gioalteeaght or gioalteeys, s. m. the 
premises or article pawned, or given in 
pledge.  
yn ghioalteeys or ghioaltiaght, s. the 
premises mortgaged, pawned, or pledged. 
G  
bargane gioalteeagh, s. m. a deed of 
mortgage. 
gioalteeaghtyn, gioalteenyn, gioalteeyn, s. 
pl. mortgages, &c.  
e ghioalteeyn or ghioaltiaghtyn, s. his 
pawns or mortgages. G  
e yioalteeaghtyn, s. his mortgages, &c. G 
e yioalteeyn, s. his pawns, &c. G 
giolteeagh, v. 
dy yioalteeagh, v. to mortgage, pawn, &c. 
G 
gioaltit, 86. pawned, pledged, mortgaged.  
s’gioaltit, a. how mortgaged or pledged. G 
gioaleyder, s. m. the pawner, pledger, or 
mortgager.  
yn ghioaleyder, s. the mortgager, pawner, 
or pledger. G  
e yioaleyder, s. his mortgager. G  
gioalteyr, s. m. the mortgagee, one who 
takes a pledge, &c. [mortgage lender, 
pawnbroker] 
yn ghioalteyr, s. m. the mortgagee. G  
e yioalteyr, s. his taker of pawn, pledge, or 
mortgagee. G 
e yioalteyrys, s. his practice of mortgagee 
or mortgaging. G 
gioot, s. m. a gift; pl. -yn. 
gioot, v. -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
ghioot, v. did gift, gifted; -agh; -in -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. G  
yioot, v. did gift or gifted; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. G 
giootal or giootey, v. gifting, bestowing.  
dy yiootal, v. to gift or bestow. G  
er ghiootal, v. hath, &c. gifted, given; Acts, 
xxvii. 24: …cur-my-ner ta Jee er ghiootal ort 
ooilley adsyn ta shiaulley mayrt. …lo, God hath 
given thee all them that sail with thee. G  
giootit, 85. gifted, bestowed.  
s’giootit, a. how gifted. G 
ro ghiootit, 85. too much gifted. G  
ro yiootit, a. too gifted. G 
gio[o]teyder, s. m. a gifter, one who gives 
gifts.  
yn ghiooteyder, s. the gifter, giver, or 
bestower. G  
yn yiooteyder, s. the gifter or bestower. G 
giuag, s. f. a gullet; pl. -yn.  
giuagagh 
s’giuagagh, a. how much in gullets or 
creeks. G 
s’giuagee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. G 
giucklagh, s. m. broom; pl. -yn.  
giucklee, a. d. of broom.  
giyn 
er-giyn, a. next after; laa er giyn (the day 
after); on again; Luke, vii. 11: As haink eh 
gy-kione yn laa er-giyn dy jagh eh gys ard-
161 
G 
 
valley va enmyssit Nain, as hie ymmodee jeh e 
ynseydee marish, as mooarrane sleih. And it 
came to pass the day after, that he went into a 
city called Nain; and many of his disciples went 
with him, and much people. 
glaare-eddin, s. f. forehead; pl. -yn.  
e ghlaare-eddin, s. his forehead. G  
glabbag, s. f. a poultice; pl. -yn.  
glack, s. f. the hollow of the hand; the loof; as 
much hemp in stalks as can be held in the 
hand at once; pl. see glick [deest]. 
glack, v. hold fast in the hand; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
glackey, v. holding fast in the hand.  
glackit, 85. held in the hand.  
s’glackit, a. how pressed in the hand. G 
glackeyder, s. m. a holder in the hand.  
glare, s. f. tongue, speech, language; pl. 
glaraghyn or -yn.  
e ghlare, s. his language, tongue &c. G  
glaare vrasnee, a. d. provoking, or 
affronting language, &c. 
glashtin, s. m. a goblin, a sprite; pl. 72 
[change -in to -eeyn].  
glass, a. pale, gray, pale blue; in a growing 
state; applied to vegetation, green, verdant; 
opposed to creen; billey glass (a growing or 
green tree); Jer. xi. 16: Ren y Chiarn uss y 
enmys, Billey-olive glass, aalin, as lesh mess 
menoyr; lesh feiyr anveagh t’eh er voaddey aile 
er, as ta ny banglaneyn eck er ny vrishey. The 
Lord called thy name, A green olive tree, fair, 
and of goodly fruit: with the noise of a great 
tumult he hath kindled fire upon it, and the 
branches of it are broken. Prov. “Freayl y 
craue glass.” [Keeping the bone green.] 
glassey, a. pl. pale, gray, green; as,  
eddinyn glassey, s. pl. (pale faces). 
claghyn glassey, s. pl. (gray stones). 
magheryn glassey, s. pl. (green fields).  
s’glass, a. how verdant, how pale or gray. 
G 
s’glassey, a. more verdant, most verdant, 
paler, palest, &c. G 
clagh-ghlass, a. a gray or blue stone. G  
bock-glass, s. m. the greyhound fish. 
gorrym-glass, s. azure blue, light blue. 
glassaghey, v. getting pale or wan, getting 
green or gray, &c.  
dy ghlassagh or ghlassaghey, v. to brighten 
or get gray. G  
glassan, s. f. a sallad.  
glasseraght, s. m. herbage, vegetation, 
verdure, grassiness; pl. 72 [change -aght to 
-eeyn].  
glass, s. m. a lock; pl. glish.  
gleish, a. d. of a lock or locks.  
glass-aileagh, s. m. a firelock.  
guilley[-]glass or -glesh, s. m. a lockman, 
more literally a lockboy. Were this the 
name of a turnkey, it would seem more 
applicable for the meaning of glass or glesh 
in this word. See the proverb on ghlass. 
glass, v. lock or make sure; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 85; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88.  
ghlass, v. did lock, or make sure; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. Prov. “Tra ta’n 
gheay sy villey yiow shiu magh yn ghlass 
ghuilley.” [When the wind is in the tree 
you will get the lockman.] G  
dy ghlassey, v. to embrace, to lock. G  
glast, 85. locked, made sure under lock.  
s’glast, a. how locked. G 
ro ghlast, 85. too locked. G  
glasseyder, s. m. a locker.  
gleash, v. stir, move; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha ghleash, v. not stir; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. G  
gleashaghey, v. stirring, moving.  
er ghleashaghey, v. hath, &c. stirred. G  
gleashit, 85. stirred, moved.  
s’gleashit, a. how stirred. G 
ro ghleashit, 85. too stirred. G  
gleasheyder, s. m. a stirrer, a mover; pl. 
-yn.  
gleck, v. wrestle, wrestling; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys.  
ghleck, v. did wrestle; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. G  
gleckit son. 85. wrestled for.  
gleckeyder, s. m. a wrestler; pl. -yn.  
yn ghleckeyder, s. the wrestler; pl. -yn. G  
gleih, s. m. a position in which to place corn 
to dry when cut; a handful of corn; Jer. ix. 
162 
G 
 
22: Dy jarroo myr eoylley tuittee kirp deiney er 
y vagher foshlit, as myr gleih-arroo lurg y 
beaynnee, as cha jean unnane erbee ad y 
haglym. Even the carcases of men shall fall as 
dung upon the open field, and as the handful 
after the harvestman, and none shall gather 
them; pl. -yn.  
gleiy, s. f. a fibre of slime or of any glutinous 
matter.  
yn ghleiy, s. the fibre of slime, &c. G  
gleiynagh, a. fibrous, slimy.  
gleiy-fannag, s. f. duck’s meat.  
glen, a. clean, clear, pure, perfect.  
s’glen, a. how clear, or pure. G 
s’glen[n]ey, a. id., comp. and sup. G 
glenney, a. pl. clean, clear, pure, perfect.  
glenn, v. cleanse, clear, &c.; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88.  
ghlen or ghlenn*, did cleanse or clean; 
-agh, -ee; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. G  
glenney, v. cleansing, cleaning, clearing.  
er ghlenney, v. hath, &c., cleansed, &c. G  
glennee, a. d. of cleansing or making clean.  
ghlennee, a. d. of cleansing. G  
glennit. 85. cleansed, purified.  
glent, 85. cleaned, cleared; a contraction of 
glennit.  
ghlennt, pt. cleansed, cleaned. G  
ro ghlennit, 85. too cleansed or cleaned. G  
glenneyder, s. m. a cleanser, &c.  
yn ghlenneyder, s. the cleanser or cleaner. 
G  
glennid, s. m. 89. cleanliness, purity, &c.  
gless, s. f. glass; pl. -yn.  
glessar, s. m. a glazier; pl. -yn.  
gless-huarystal, s. m. a looking-glass, a 
mirror.  
glib, a. pert, fluent.  
s’glib, a. how fluent, comp. and sup. G 
glick, a. pat, coming in quick succession.  
gliee 
er-ghlee, [adv]. a breaming. A sow pig is 
said to be so when she wants the boar. 
gliee[-]mian, s. f. concupiscence, lust.  
glion, s. f. a glen, a valley, a hollow between 
mountains; pl. -teeyn.  
glionney, a. d. of the glen or valley.  
glionnagh, a. having glens or vallies.  
glionnan, s. f. a small valley.  
yn ghlionan, s. the small valley, the dim. of 
glion. G  
glioon, s. f. a knee, a crooked timber, as a 
knee when bent. 
yn ghlioon, s. the knee; pl. -yn. G  
glioon, v. kneel; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
ghlioon, v. did kneel; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. G  
gliooney, v. kneeling.  
dy ghliooney, v. to kneel. G  
glioonit or glioont, 85. kneeled; a. having 
knees, kneed.  
gliooneyder, s. m. a kneeler.  
yn ghliooneyder, s. the kneeler. G  
glioonagh, s. f. a disease in the knees; pl. 
-yn; a herb, arsmart, lakeweed, water 
pepper.  
yn ghlioonagh, s. the &c. See glioonagh. G  
clioagagh gliwnagh, s. f. gladwin or 
stinking gladwin. 
gliooneen, s. f. a garter; pl. -yn.  
glistyr, s. m. clyster; pl. -yn.  
gloas, v. polish, gloss; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
gloasaghey or gloasey, v. polishing, 
glossing.  
gloasit, 85. polished, glossed.  
s’gloasit, a. how glossed or polished. G 
gloaseyder, s. m. a polisher; pl. -yn.  
gloo, s. m. warp, the order of thread 
lengthways in a web; pl. -yn.  
e ghloo, s. his warp; pl. -ghyn. G  
glooag, s. f. a lump of something to wind 
yarn on, to make a ball or bottom; pl. -yn.  
glooie, a. close texture in weaving, closely 
or thickly wove.  
glout, s. m. a shapeless lump of any thing. 
Prov. Surree eh yn flout, my yiow eh yn 
glout. [He’ll suffer the taunt if he gets the 
lump.] 
gloyee, s. f. straw taken from the flails after 
being threshed, without being ruffled, to 
make straw ropes of.  
gloyr, s. m. glory; pl. -aghyn or -yn. 
e ghloyr, s. his glory; pl. -aghyn. G  
163 
G 
 
gloyrey, a. d. of glory.  
gloyr, v. glorify; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88  
ghloyr, v. did glorify; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. G  
gloyraghey, v. glorifying.  
dy ghloyraghey, v. to glorify. G  
gloyrit, 85. glorified, gloried.  
gloyreyder, s. m. a glorifier.  
yn ghloyreyder, s. the glorifier; pl. -yn. G  
gloyroil, a. glorious.  
s’gloyroil, a. how glorious. G 
s’gloyroiley, a. id., comp. and sup. G 
feer ghloyroil, a. very glorious. G  
gloyroilid, s. m. gloriousness.  
e ghloyroilid, s. his gloriousness. G  
glug, s. a gurgle; pt. -yn.  
glugeraght or glugernee, v. gurgling, the 
noise made on emptying a cask, bottle, &c. 
when there is no passage for the air but that 
from which the liquid comes.  
glut, s. a piece of timber nailed on a larger to 
hinder some thing passing any further.  
glutteraght, v. gluttoning.  
glutterey, s. m. a glutton; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn].  
yn ghlutterey, s. the glutton. G  
gow, v. take, receive, go, take thy way; Prov. 
“Gow coyrle bleb son keayrt.” [Take a 
fool’s advice for once.] 
gow hood hene eh, adv. pl. take it or him 
to thyself.  
gow-lesh, adv. say on; 1 Sam. xv. 16: Eisht 
dooyrt Samuel rish Saul, Fuirree, as insh-ym 
dhyt, cre ta’n Chiarn er ghra rhym’s noght. As 
dooyrt eh rish, Gow lesh. Then Samuel said 
unto Saul, Stay, and I will tell thee what the 
Lord hath said to me this night. And he said 
unto him, Say on.  
gowee, v. will or shall take; Gen. xx. 11: As 
dooyrt Abraham, Er-y-fa dy smooinee mee, son 
shickyrys, cha vel aggle Yee, syn ynnyd shoh, 
as gowee ad ersooyl my vioys er choontey my 
ven. And Abraham said, Because I thought, 
Surely the fear of God is not in this place; and 
they will slay me for my wife’s sake. Prov. 
“Gowee bleb rish e voylley as cha; gow 
dooinney creeney rish e phlaiynt.” [A fool 
will acknowledge his praise, and a wise 
man will not acknowledge his complaint.] 
goym, v. I will, &c. take; -s, id. em.  
gowym, v. See goym.  
gowyms. See goyms.  
goys, v. shall or will take or receive, take, 
takes, taketh, receive, &c.  
gowys. See goys.  
ghow, v. did take. See gow. G  
my ghowym, p. if I take. See goym. G  
my ghowyms, p. id. em. See goyms. G  
my ghowys, v. see goys. G 
goghe, v. (from gow-agh), would take.  
gowagh, v. See goghe.  
ghoghe, v. (from ghowagh), would take. G  
goin, v. (from gow-in), I would take; -s, id. 
em.  
gowin. See goin; gowins. See goins.  
ghoin, p. (from ghowin), I would take. G  
ghoins, p. idem. em. G  
goaill, v. (gow al), taking. This verb is 
much used in composition in the Manks, as 
in the following words.  
gowal, v. See goaill.  
dy ghoaill, v. to take, to partake. G  
goaill ayns laue or goail as laue, v. 
presuming to say, undertaking or engaging 
to do, taking in hand, to suppose or say.  
goaill-er, v. to arrogate or assume.  
goaill-foalley, s. m. incarnation.  
goaill-lhuingys, v. embarking; s. 
embarkation.  
goaill-niart, v. prevailing; a. prevalent.  
goaill-raad, v. prevailing; 1 Chron. xxi. 4: 
Ny-yeih, ghow goan y ree raad noi Joab. 
Nevertheless the king’s word prevailed against 
Joab.  
goaill-rish, v. acknowledging, admitting; 
dy ghoaill-rish (to acknowledge or admit). 
goaill-stiagh, v. including, taking in.  
goaill-toshiaght, v. beginning, 
commencing.  
goaill-yindys, v. wondering. See also 
gindys.  
goit, 85. (from gow-it), taken.  
gowit. See goit.  
goaillagh or goailtagh, a. contagious.  
goailltys, s. contagion; pl. -syn.  
goal, s. the fork of any thing between where 
the branches, prong, or legs branch out or 
164 
G 
 
diverge; pl. -yn.  
e ghoayl, s. big fork, or divergement of the 
thighs. G  
goal-thoo, s. thatch held or made sure on a 
house, &c., by forks made of briars or 
wattles, which are cut in short junks, bent, 
twisted and pointed, and pushed through 
the thatch into the straw to bind the thatch 
on; whence. I suppose. this kind of 
thatching takes its name. 
goal-thoo, v. thatching in the above 
manner; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
gallthoo. See goal-thoo.  
goal-thooit, 85. thatched in the above 
manner.  
gollage, s. f. a fork of any kind but a flesh-
fork; pl. -yn.  
yn ghollage, s. the pitch-fork, or any fork 
of timber, &c.; pl. -yn. G  
gollageagh, a. forked, branched.  
goaldagh, s. m. a guest; pl. 71 [change -agh 
to -ee].  
goan, or (as Dr. Kelly has it in his grammar) 
goaun, a. scarce, rare, hard to be had; it is 
the latter spelling which is in the prayer 
book; Psl. xii. 1: Cooin lhiam, Hiarn, son cha 
vel un dooinney crauee faagit: son cha vel y 
vooinjer ynrick agh goaun mastey cloan 
gheiney. Help me, Lord, for there is not one 
godly man left: for the faithful are minished from 
among the children of men.  
s’goan, a. how scarce. See s’coan. G 
s’coan, a. how scarce or scant, scarcely. 
This word ought to be written s’goan. C 
ro ghoan, a. too scarce. G 
s’ghenney, a. scarcer, scarcest; the comp. 
and sup. of goan. 
gonney, a. pl. scarce; Gen. xli. 50: As da 
Joseph va er ny ruggey daa vac roish my daink 
ny bleeantyn gonney; ren Asenath, inneen 
Potipherah prince jeh On, gymmyrkey da. And 
unto Joseph were born two sons before the 
years of famine came, which Asenath the 
daughter of Potipherah priest of On bare unto 
him.  
ghonney, a. scarce. See also ghoan; Jer. 
xvii. 8: Son bee eh myr billey soit rish oirr yn 
ushtey, as ta skeayley magh e fraueyn rish yn 
awin, as cha nennee eh tra ta’n chiass loshtee 
cheet, agh bee e ghuillag glass; as ’sy vleïn 
ghonney cha bee eh anveagh, chamoo nee eh 
scuirr veih gymmyrkey mess. For he shall be as 
a tree planted by the waters, and that 
spreadeth out her roots by the river, and shall 
not see when heat cometh, but her leaf shall be 
green; and shall not be careful in the year of 
drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit. 
This ought to be a pl. G  
genney, s. m. scarcity, famine; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn].  
yn ghenney, s. the scarcity. G  
gennish, a. barren.  
s’gennish, a. how barren, comp. and sup. G 
ro ghennish, a. too barren. G  
bossan gennish, s. [m]. barren wort. 
e ghennishid, s. his barrenness. G  
goanlys, s. f. spite, malice, hatred, malignity.  
goanlyssagh, a. spiteful, malicious; s. m. a 
spiteful or malicious person; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee].  
s’goanlyssagh, a. how malicious. G 
s’goanlyssee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. 
G 
goanstyrnee or gounstyrnee, v. barking, 
yelping.  
goayr, s. f. a goat; pl. 76 [goair].  
goayrey, a. d. of a goat or goats.  
goayragh, a. goatish.  
gob, s. m. beak, neb, bill; the mouth in 
contempt.  
e ghob, s. his mouth in contempt. G  
gob doo, s. m. a muscle [sc. mussel].  
gib, s. pl. beaks; a. d. of mouths in 
contempt.  
e ghib, a. d. of his mouth; as, dy huittym 
gour e ghib (to f[a]ll mouth ways, or with 
the mouth foremost). See gob. G  
gobbaghyn, s. pl. muzzles on the mouth.  
gobbag, s. f. a sea dog, a dog fish; pl. -yn.  
gobbag-oayll, a species of dogfish, that 
stays on frequented places. I believe this to 
be the word, and not gobbag-ghoal, as the 
fish is not blind.  
gobbey, v. budding, springing out of the 
ground, coming out of the shoot.  
goblaghyn, s. pl. compasses, dividers.  
165 
G 
 
goblan-marrey, s. f. a red-shank.  
goggan, s. f. a noggin or piggin; pl. -yn.  
goll, v. going.  
goll er mullagh ching, v. going at short 
notice, in a hurry or bustle.  
golleyder, s. m. a goer; pl. -yn.  
goll-twoaie, s. m. a rainbow; pl. -yn.  
e gholl, v. his going. G  
er-gholl, v. hath, &c. gone; when after va, 
had, &c. gone.  
er-n’gholl, v. hath, &c. gone, gone.  
er n’gholl, pt. hath, &c. gone. G  
 
hed, v. will, wilt, or shall, shalt go.  
hem, p. p. I will go; -s, id. em. G  
hem-mayd, p. p. we will or shall go. G  
hed oo, v. (pronounced he’oo) thou wilt go. 
jem or jedym, v. shall or will I go [?]; -s, 
id. em.  
jem-mayd, p. shall we go; 2 Chron. xviii. 
5: …as dooyrt eh roo, Jem mayd dy chaggey 
noi Ramoth-gilead, ny lhig-ym shaghey? As 
dooyrt ad, Immee seose, son nee yn Chiarn y 
livrey eh gys laue yn ree. …and said unto them, 
Shall we go to Ramothgilead to battle, or shall I 
forbear? And they said, Go up; for God will 
deliver it into the king's hand.  
jed oo, or je’oo, v. wilt thou go. The 
answer in the affirmative would be hed; in 
the negative, cha jed.  
jeu, p. (a contraction of jig oo), wilt thou 
go or come.  
hed is used for go, hig for come. See 62.  
 
hie, v. went, did go.  
hiee, p. she went or did go.  
hieish, p. she went, em.  
 
jagh, v. went, did go; Prov. “Cha jagh 
moylley ghooinney hene rieau foddey voish 
e ghorrys.” [A man’s praise for himself 
never went far from his door.] 
ragh, v. would go; cha ragh (would not 
go). 
roïn, p. I would go; -s, id. em. 
raghin, p. I would go. 
raghins, p. id. em. See ro’in. 
 
goll-rish, adv. p. like him; -yn, id. em.  
goll-ree, adv. p. like her; -ish, id. em.  
goll-roo, adv. p. like them; -syn, id. em.  
goll-rhym, adv. p. like me; -s, id. em.  
goll-rooin, adv. p. like us; -yn, id. em.  
goll-rhyt, adv. p. like thee; -s, id. em.  
goll-ry-cheilley, adv. like one another, 
alike.  
gollage, s. f. an earwig; pl. -yn.  
yn ghollage, s. the ear-wig; pl. -yn. G  
gollan-geayee, s. a swallow; pl. gollanyn-
geayee. Prov. “Cha jean un ghollan-
geayee sourey, ny un chellagh keylley 
geurey.” [One swallow will not make 
summer, nor one woodcock winter.] 
goo, s. m. word; fame, reputation.  
e ghoo, s. his word, his fame. G  
goan, s. pl. words. There are scarcely any 
two words in the Manks that mean exactly 
the same thing. Focklyn is nearly syn. with 
this, but focklyn only means a few words; 
goan means a series of words, a 
continuation of words, speech; the pl. of 
goo.  
goo-Yee, s. m. the word of God, the 
Scripture.  
anghoo, s. m. ill fame, infamy, disgrace. 
anghooagh, a. infamous, disgraceful. 
ard-ghoo, s. m. fame; Num. xvi. 2: As hass 
ad seose noi Moses, marish shiartanse dy 
chloan Israel, daa cheead as jeih as da-eed 
prince jeh’n cheshaght, jeh ard ghoo mastey’n 
pobble, deiney ooasle. And they rose up before 
Moses, with certain of the children of Israel, two 
hundred and fifty princes of the assembly, 
famous in the congregation, men of renown.  
drogh-ghoo, s. m. ill fame, reproach, 
scandal, disgrace, discredit. 
gooddin, s. m. a tubercle, pimple, or small 
bile [i.e. boil].  
goon, s. m. a minister’s gown or surplice; pl. 
-yn.  
goorlagh, s. m. the grume of the eye. 
goot 
yn ghoot, s. the gout; pl. -yn. G  
ro ghootagh, a. too gouty. G  
gorley or goarley, s. m. a disease.  
goarley. See gorley.  
166 
G 
 
yn ghorley, s. the galling. G  
gorley-cadlee, s. lethargy.  
gorley-carragh, s. the scurvy.  
gorley-crauagh or -crouagh, s. a disease 
in the feet or hoofs of cattle.  
gorley-gailley, s. the colic or belly ache.  
gorley-ghollagh, s. a disease causing 
blindness, or dimness of sight.  
gorley-plooghee, s. the quinsy.  
gorley-scoaldee, s. the lues venerea.  
gorley-shymlee, s. a consumption.  
coshee-ghorley, s. pl. travellers that have 
some ailment in their feet, lame travellers. 
Gorree 
bhow-Ghorree, s. m. the Galaxy or Milky 
Way. 
gorrym, s. m. blue. See also gorm [deest].  
fir ghormey, a. pl. blue ones. G  
s’gorrym, a. how blue. G 
s’gorrymey, a. id., comp. and sup. G 
gorrym-jiarg, s. purple.  
gorrym-glass, s. azure blue, light blue.  
doo-gorrym, a. purple.  
doo-gorrymid, s. m. purpleness. 
freoaghane-ghorrym, s. f. a bilberry. 
gorm, v. 
ghorm, v. did make blue; -agh; -ee; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms , -ys, 94. G  
gormaghey, v. 
dy ghormaghey, v. to colour blue, or make 
blue. G  
gorrymit. 85. blued, made blue.  
ro ghormit. 85. too much blued, G  
yn ghormeyder, s. the dyer of blue. G  
gormid 
e ghormid, s. his blueness. G  
girmid, s. m. blueness. See also gormid.  
gort or gortee, v. hurt; -agh, 77; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
ghort or ghortee, v. did hurt; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. G  
gortagh or gortaghey, v. hurting.  
s’gortit, a. how hurt. G 
gortagh, s. 
yn ghortagh, s. the hurt; pl. -yn. G  
gorteyder, s. m. one who hurts. 
gort, a. stale, flat; sour, bitter.  
s’gort, a. how stale. G 
s’gortey, a. id., comp. and sup. G 
gortagh, a. parsimonious, stingy, scant.  
ro ghortagh, a. too sparingly. G  
gortey, s. m. famine, dearth, scarcity.  
yn ghortey, s. the famine; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn]. G  
gosh, s. m. what is said to call geese.  
goshtiu or goshtoo, s. m. f. a sponsor at the 
baptismal font, a gossip; pl. -yn.  
goull, s. a beam or ray; John’s day collect.  
e ghoull, s. his beam or ray. G  
graih, s. f. love; pl. -yn.  
e ghraih, s. his love. G  
graih-my-chree, s. my heart’s love.  
graihagh, a. loving, lovesome.  
dy graihagh, adv. lovingly.  
s’graihagh, a. how loving, with what love. 
G 
s’graihee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58; Mat. 
x. 37: Eshyn ta ny s’graihee er ayr ny moir na 
orrym’s, cha vel eh feeu jee’m: as eshyn ta ny 
s’graihee er mac ny inneen na orrym’s cha vel 
eh feeu jee’m. He that loveth father or mother 
more than me is not worthy of me: and he that 
loveth son or daughter more than me is not 
worthy of me. G 
feer ghraihagh, a. very loving or lovingly. 
G  
kenjallys-graihagh, s. m. loving kindness. 
graihder, s. m. a lover.  
e ghraihder, s. his lover; pl. -yn. G  
graihaltagh, s. 
e ghraihaltagh, s. his lover; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee]. G  
graihaltee or graihderyn, s. pl. lovers.  
graihoil, a. lovely.  
s’graihoil, a. how lovely. G 
s’graihoiley, a. id., comp. and sup. G 
dy graihoil or graihoilagh, adv. lovingly  
feer ghraihoil, a. very lovely. G  
graihoilid or graihoilys, s. m. loveliness.  
e ghraihoilid or ghraihoilys, s. his 
loveliness. G  
grain, s. m. oat-grist.  
grainn or gra[i]nnee, v. grave, carve; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
ghrain or ghrainn*, v. did grave or carve; 
-agh; -ee; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. 
167 
G 
 
ghrainnee, v. did, &c. grave. See ghrain. G  
grainnaghey, v. graving, carving.  
dy ghrainnaghey, v. to grave or carve. G  
er ghrainney, v. hath, &c. graven, &c. G  
grainnit, 85. graved, carved.  
s’granit, a. how graven. G 
ro ghrainnit, 85. too graven or carved. G  
grainneyder, s. m. a carver, a graver.  
yn ghrainneyder, s. the graver, &c. G  
graney, a. ugly, deformed, not pretty.  
s’graney, a. how ugly or deformed, comp. 
and sup. G 
feer ghraney, <s.> [a.] very ugly or 
deformed. G  
granaghey, v. getting ugly or deformed.  
granid, s. m. ugliness, deformity.  
e ghranid, s. his ugliness or deformity. G  
grangan, s. m. a cross peevish person; pl. 
-yn.  
granganagh, a. crabbed, peevish.  
granganid or granganys, s. m. 
crabbedness.  
grannee, s. f. a grandam.  
grape, s. f. an instrument to lift dung.  
grash, s. f. a bout of sickness; a job or turn of 
work.  
graue, s. f. grief.  
graue-aash, s. f. uneasiness, restlessness.  
graue-aashagh, a. uneasy, restless.  
grayse, s. f. grace, pl. -yn.  
e ghrayse, s. his grace; pl. 69 [change -e to 
-yn]. G  
grayse-lhiettalagh, s. f. preventing grace.  
gyn-grayse, adv. graceless. 
graysoil, a. gracious, graceful.  
s’graysoil, a. how gracious. G  
s’graysoiley, a. id., comp. and sup. G 
feer ghraysoil, a. very gracious. G  
graysoilid, s. m. gracefulness, 
graciousness.  
e ghraysoilid, s. his graciousness. G  
greain, s. f. grudge, aversion; a smart felt 
through the nervous system of the body, on 
hearing or seeing any thing sudden or 
awful.  
greain voght ort, s. (an imprecation), that 
thy nerves may be poor.  
greas, s. industry in making clothing.  
dty ghrease, s. thy industry, &c. G  
greasag, a. industrious [in] housewifery.  
ben ghreassag, a. an industrious woman 
for spinning and making clothing. G  
greasee, s. m. a shoemaker; pl. -yn.  
greaseeys, s. m. shoemaking, the craft of a 
shoemaker.  
gred-hiass, s. m. a glowing, grilling, 
scorching heat. Perhaps the gred in this 
word is the Manks of the word grid in 
English; as, gridiron (yiarn greddee).  
gred or gredd*, v. parch, grill, or roast; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
greddee, a. a hot fulsome smell or stink, 
when applied to smell; as, soar greddee.  
greddan, s. f. parched corn; meinn 
ghreddan (meal of parched corn).  
greddanit, 85. parched, grilled, roasted.  
greeish, s. f. a stair; pl. -yn.  
grees or greesee, v. stir up to action, kindle to 
wrath, stimulate; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
ghrees* or ghreesee, v. did stir up to 
action, or kindle to wrath; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. G  
greesey, v. stirring up, agitating.  
greesaghey, v. kindling, stirring, 
stimulating, provoking to action.  
dy ghreesaghey, v. to kindle or stir to 
action or wrath; Exod. xxxii. 19: …as 
ghreesee corree Voses, as hilg eh ny buird ass 
e laueyn, as vrish eh ad ec bun y clieau. …and 
Moses’ anger waxed hot, and he cast the 
tables out of his hands, and brake them 
beneath the mount; and Lam. iv. 11: Ta’n 
Chiarn er chooilleeney e eulys, t’eh er 
gheayrtey magh dewilys e yymmoose, as er 
ghreesey aile ayns Zion, as t’eh er stroie ny 
undinyn eck. The Lord hath accomplished his 
fury; he hath poured out his fierce anger, and 
hath kindled a fire in Zion, and it hath devoured 
the foundations thereof. G  
greesit, 85. stirred, agitated, provoked.  
s’greesit, a. how stimulated. G 
ro ghreesit, 85. too stirred or agitated. G  
greeseyder, s. m. a stirrer, a poker; pl. -yn.  
greesagh, s. f. live ashes, red hot ashes or 
168 
G 
 
coals.  
yn ghreesagh, s. the embers, the live coals 
or ashes. G  
greie, s. m. a tool, gear, instrument, utensil, or 
implement; pl. -yn.  
e ghreiy, s. his tool or instrument. G  
e ghreighyn, s. his tools. G  
greigh or greie, v. gear, harness, furnish 
with tools, gear, or implements; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
greighey, v. gearing, harnessing.  
greit, 85. geared, harnessed; furnished with 
tools.  
s’greit, a. how geared or harnessed; how 
well stocked with tools. G 
greigheyder, s. m. a gearer; a furnisher of 
tools or implements; pl. -yn.  
greim or greme, s. m. a bite, hold, stitch, 
gobbet, or bit; pl. -nyn. Prov. “Ta greme 
ayns traa cooie, sauail nuy.” [A stitch in 
time saves nine.] 
e ghreim or ghreme, s. his hold, grasp, 
stitch, or bite; pl. -yn. G  
greim-collane, s. f. a gripe.  
greim or greimm*, v. bite, hold; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88  
ghreim, v. did hold, grasp, stitch, &c.; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. G  
greimmey, pt. biting, stitching, grasping, 
holding; Exod. xv. 14: Clynnee yn pobble, as 
bee aggle orroo; nee seaghyn greimmey 
cummaltee Phalestina. The people shall hear, 
and be afraid: sorrow shall take hold on the 
inhabitants of Palestina.  
er ghreimey, v. hath, &c. bit, grasped, 
caught hold of, stitched. G  
greimmit, 85. bit, stitched, grasped.  
s’greimmit, a. grasped or bit. G 
ro ghreimit, 85. too much stitched, 
grasped, &c. G 
greimmeyder, s. m. a biter, stitcher, holder.  
grein, greinn*, or greinnee, v. encourage, 
incite, or prompt to action; Isa. xiii. 17: Cur-
my-ner, greinnee-yms seose ny Medeyn nyn’oï, 
nagh bee scansh oc jeh argid; as er son airh, cha 
vel ad goaill taitnys ayn. Behold, I will stir up the 
Medes against them, which shall not regard silver; 
and as for gold, they shall not delight in it; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
ghreinn* or ghreinnee, v. did urge or 
stimulate, did encourage or raise the mind to 
action; <Ezra, i. 5> [See below, er 
ghreinnaghey]; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; 
-ys, 94. G  
greinnaghey, v. encouraging, inciting to 
prompt to action.  
er ghreinnaghey, v. hath, &c. stimulated or 
encouraged to something: Ezra, i. 5: Eisht hrog 
orroo ard-gheiney ayraghyn Yudah, as Venjamin, 
as ny saggyrtyn, as ny Leviteyn, mâroosyn ooilley, 
ny spyrrydyn oc va Jee er ghreinnaghey dy gholl 
seose, dy hroggal thie’n Chiarn, t’ayns Jerusalem. 
Then rose up the chief of the fathers of Judah and 
Benjamin, and the priests, and the Levites, with all 
them whose spirit God had raised, to go up to 
build the house of the Lord which is in Jerusalem. 
G  
greinney, v.  
yn ghreinney, v. the urging, &c. G  
gre[i]nnit, 85. encouraged, prompt.  
greinneyder, s. m. an encourager or enciter.  
grein-aadjyn, s. pl. greaves.  
griaght, s. a group, a drove.  
e ghriaght, s. his group, or drove; pl. -yn. 
G  
griaghtagh, a. gregarious.  
s’griaghtagh, a. how gregarious or in 
droves. G 
s’griaghtee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. G 
grian, s. m. sun; pl. -yn. I have marked this 
word of the masculine gender; see Psl. xix. 
[5]: Ayndoo t’eh er hoiaghey cabbane son y 
ghrian; ta cheet magh myr dooinney-poosee 
ass e hiamyr, as goaill boggey myr dooinney 
lajer dy roie e choorse. In them hath he set a 
tabernacle for the sun: which cometh forth as a 
bridegroom out of his chamber, and rejoiceth 
as a giant to run his course; although 
common usage is against it.  
yn ghrian, s. the sun. Prov. “My ta’n 
ghrian jiarg tra girree t’eh, foddee shiu 
jerkal rish fliaghey.” [If the sun is red 
when it rises, you may expect rain.] G 
greiney, a. d. of, or belonging to, the sun.  
cassan-ny-greiney, s. m. the zodiac. 
169 
G 
 
irree-ny-greinney, [s.] m. the rising of the 
sun. 
lhie-ghreiney, s. m. sunset, the setting of 
the sun. 
breck-sy-ghrian, s. f. spots or freckles on 
the skin, caused by the heat of the sun. 
grianey, v. 
dy ghrianey, v. to sun, or air in the 
sunshine. G  
grianagh, a. sunny, sun-shiny.  
s’grianagh, a. how sunny. G 
s’grianee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. G 
feer ghrianagh, a. [very] sunny. G  
gribbey, s. m. the hollow for dung in a cow-
house; pl. 67 [change -ey to -aghyn].  
grig, s. m. the beat of a clock or watch, a 
second.  
grigyraght, v. beating as a clock or watch.  
grinder, s. m. a satirist, a taunter; pl. -yn.  
grynder. See grinder.  
yn ghrynder, s. the giber. G  
grinderagh, v. taunting, talking 
contumeliously.  
s’grinderagh, a. how much for taunting. G 
s’grinderee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. G 
grindee or grinderyn, s. pl. mockers, 
taunters, ridiculers; Psl. xxxv. 16: Marish ny 
brynnyree va grindeyryn connyssagh: ren 
snaggeraght orrym lesh nyn veeacklyn. With 
the flatterers were busy mockers: who gnashed 
upon me with their teeth.  
grinderys, s. f. sarcasm. 
grine, s. m. a grain; pl. -yn.  
e ghrine, s. his grain; pl. -yn. G  
grine-achlish, s. m. a small grain of oats 
that grows with another.  
grineagh, a. grainy.  
s’grineagh, a. how grainy. G 
s’grinee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. G 
ro ghrineagh, s. too grainy. G  
grineen, s. f. very small grain, a grit.  
grineenagh, a. gritty.  
grineenid, s. m. grittiness.  
grinney, s. f. a gate, a gateway; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn].  
yn ghreinney [sic], s. the gate. G  
griu, s. f. the goods that are found in the 
possession of a thief or felon; that which 
criminates a criminal; Gen. xxx. 33: Dy 
chooilley unnane nagh vel breck as spottagh 
mastey ny goair, as loaghtyn mastey ny kirree, 
lhig da shen ve coontit myr griu vaarlee. Every 
one that is not speckled and spotted among the 
goats, and brown among the sheep, that shall 
be counted stolen with me; pl. -ghyn.  
yn ghriu, s. the goods stolen that criminate 
the felon; as, yn ghriu vaarlee. G  
groam, s. m. a sad, sorry, or sullen look; Gen. 
iv. 5: Agh jeh Cain as jeh e oural cha ren eh 
soiaghey: as va Cain feer jymmoosagh, as va 
groam er e eddin. But unto Cain and to his 
offering he had not respect. And Cain was very 
wroth, and his countenance fell.  
groamagh, a. sorrowful, sorry, dejected, 
sullen countenance; Gen. iv. 6: As dooyrt y 
Chiarn rish Cain, Cre’n-fa t’ou jymmoosagh? as 
cre’n-fa t’ou jeeaghyn cha groamagh? And the 
Lord said unto Cain, Why art thou wroth? and 
why is thy countenance fallen?  
s’groamagh, a. how sad or low hearted, 
how sullen. G 
s’groamee, a. id., comp. and sup. G 
groamid, s. m. sullenness, dejectedness.  
groo, s. m. curd; pl. -ghyn.  
groo[-]sniuys or groo[-]noays, s. m. 
blestings or new curd, made of the milk of 
a cow newly done calving.  
grissniuys. See groosniuys.  
groobin, s. m. a cooper’s tool, crowis, 
groover.  
groudle, s. m. a crowder; pl. -yn or 76 
[groudil].  
grouw, a. gloomy, gruff, sulky.  
feer ghrouw, a. very gloomy; grim, sullen, 
&c. G  
grouwid, s. m. gloom, sulkiness.  
dy ghrooid, s. of gloominess; Zeph. i. 15: 
Ta’n laa shen, laa dy yymmoose, laa dy 
hrimshey, as dy arkys, laa dy hraartys as toyrt-
mow, laa dy ghorraghys as dy ghrooid, laa dy 
vodjallyn as dorraghys dullyr. That day is a day 
of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of 
wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness 
and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick 
darkness. G  
grouig, s. f. a frown; pl. -yn. 
170 
G 
 
e ghrouig, s. his frown; pl. -yn. G  
grouig, v. frown; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
grouigey, v. frowning.  
grouigagh, a. having frowns.  
gruaie, s. f. grimace, a grief worn face, a 
grim, sad, or sorry countenance; Isaiah, 
xxv. 8: Nee eh sluggey seose baase ayns 
barriaght, as nee yn Chiarn Jee glenney 
ersooyl jeir veih dy chooilley ghruaie. He will 
swallow up death in victory; and the Lord God 
will wipe away tears from off all faces.  
e ghruaie, s. his grimace; his ghastly or 
grief worn countenance. G  
gruane, s. m. the gill of a fish; pl. -yn.  
grummag 
keyllagh-ny-grummag 
grunsdyl, s. f. groundsel. [l. grundsyl ?] 
grunt, s. m. ground, bottom, sole; as, grunt 
my chass (the sole of my foot).  
yn ghrunt, s. the ground. G  
er-y-ghrunt, adv. on the ground, aground. 
gyn-grunt, adv. bottomless, without 
bottom. 
grunt-thie, s. m. housestead, the ground the 
house stands on.  
gruntit 
s’gruntit, a. how grounded. G 
gryle, s. f. a griddle; pl. -yn.  
gubb or gubbon, s. f. a young gull, guillimot.  
guee, v. praying, beseeching, intreating; -agh, 
77; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88; Jer. xi. 14: Shen-y-fa ny jean uss guee 
ass lieh yn phobble shoh, chamoo jean aghin 
ny padjer y hebbal er nyn son. Therefore pray 
not thou for this people, neither lift up a cry or 
prayer for them.  
ghuee, v. did beseech, besought, or intreat, 
did pray or prayed; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys. 94. G  
gueeit, 85. prayed, besought.  
yn ghueeder, s. the beseecher or intreater. 
G  
guess, s. m. a time observer; 2 Kings, xxi. 6: 
As hug eh er e vac dy gholl trooid yn aile, as 
deiyr eh er guessyn, as hug eh rish 
buitcheraght, as ghell eh rish spyrrydyn 
faishnee as fir-obbee. And he made his son 
pass through the fire, and observed times, and 
used enchantments, and dealt with familiar 
spirits and wizards.  
guillag 
yn ghuillag, s. the leech. G  
guilley, s. m. a boy; pl. 69 [change -ey to 
-yn].  
yn ghuilley, s. the boy; pl. 69. G  
e yuilley, s. his boy; pl. 69. G  
guilley[-]bing, s. m. the herb cockshead 
medic.  
guilley[-]glass or -glesh, s. m. a lockman, 
more literally a lockboy. Were this the 
name of a turnkey, it would seem more 
applicable for the meaning of glass or glesh 
in this word. See the proverb on ghlass.  
guilley-ny-ritlag, s. m. the manifold tripe.  
guilley-ny-ushtey, s. m. the smallest of the 
young at a litter or birth. 
Gilchreest, s. m. Christopher. 
guin or guinn*, s. m. a pain, an acute pain. 
This is thought to be the original Manks of 
pain. 
faastguin, s. f. a sponge; pl. -yn. [?] 
guinnagh, a. painful, sore. We pronounce 
this word gonnagh.  
gonnagh, a. (from guinnagh), sore, painful; 
saucy, peevish.  
s’connagh, or more properly s’gonnagh, a. 
how sore, how crabbed. C  
s’connee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
s’gonnagh, a. how sore. G 
s’gonnee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. G 
ro ghonnagh, a. too sore, too crabbed. G  
gonnid or gonnys, s. m. soreness, as 
expressed in the following Prov. “Cha vel 
sonnys gonnys” (Store is no sore).  
guin or guinn*, v. to pain or give pain; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
guinney, v. paining, giving pain.  
guint, 85. pained, a sudden pain as shot in 
some part of the body, an elf shot.  
s’guint, a. how racked with pain, how 
wounded or pained. G 
guintagh, s. m. one who is pained or 
wounded; the pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee], is 
in Ez. xxvi. 15: Nagh jean ny ellanyn craa 
171 
G 
 
lesh feiyr dty lhieggey, tra ta ny guintee 
gyllaghey, tra vees traartys jeant cheu-sthie 
jeed? hall not the isles shake at the sound of 
thy fall, when the wounded cry, when the 
slaughter is made in the midst of thee? and 
xxviii. 23: Son ver-yms stiagh yn phlaih urree, 
as fuill stiagh ayns ny straïdyn eck, as bee ny 
guintee er nyn mriwnys ayns y vean eck, 
liorish yn chliwe urree, er dy chooilley heu. For I 
will send into her pestilence, and blood into her 
streets; and the wounded shall be judged in the 
midst of her by the sword upon her on every 
side.  
guirr, v. hatch, hatching, &c.; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88.  
ghuir or ghuirr*, v. did hatch, hatched; 
-agh; -ys, 94. G  
dy ghuirr, v. to hatch. G  
guirt, 85. hatched.  
guirragh, a. ad[d]le, rotten; clucking; 
fowls are said to be so when in a hatching 
state.  
s’guirragh, a. how addle or rotten; as eggs 
when so, how much in a hatching state, as a 
hen or fowl when so. G 
s’guirree, a. id., comp. and sup. G 
ro ghuirragh, a. too adle or rotten as eggs, 
too much in a hatching state. G  
guiy, s. m. a goose,  
yn yuiy, s. the goose. G  
faiyr-guiy, s. f. goose grass. 
guoiee, s. pl. geese, the pl. of guiy.  
gioee, s. pl. geese, the pl. of guiy.  
e ghuoee, s. his geese. G  
gull, v. howl, yell; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88; Jer. 
xxv. 34: Gull-jee, shiuish vochillyn, as keayn-
jee as seiy-jee shiu hene ’sy joan, shiuish 
leeideilee y chioltane. Howl, ye shepherds, and 
cry; and wallow yourselves in the ashes, ye 
principal of the flock.  
ghull, v. did yell, yelp, or howl; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. G  
gullal or gullyrnee, v. howling, yelling; 
Jer. ii. 15: Ren ny lionyn aegey garveigagh 
n’oi as gullyrnee. The young lions roared upon 
him, and yelled.  
e ghullyrnee, pt. his yelling, howling, &c. 
G  
gur eh mie eu, God send you good, thank 
you.  
gurneil 
dy ghurneil, v. to govern; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -ys, 94. G  
e ghurneillys, v. his governing. G  
gwee, v. curse; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 88; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87;-ys, 88.  
ghwee, v. did curse; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. G  
wee, v. did curse or beseech; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. G 
gweeaghyn, v. cursing.  
dy weeaghyn, v. to curse. G 
e ghweeaghyn, s. his cursing. G  
gweeit, 85. cursed.  
ro weeit, a. too cursed. G  
gweeder, s. m. a curser; pl. -yn.  
yn ghweeder, s. the curser. G  
yn weeder, s. the curser. G 
gyere, a. sour, tart, sharp, strict, rigid, 
rigorous. 
geyre, a. sharp. See also gyere.  
geayr, a. sour, acid; Isa. xviii. 5: Son roish 
yn ouyr, lurg da’n blaa v’er jeet gys slane aase, 
as y berrish-feeyney geayr er n’appaghey ayns 
y vlaa, giare-ee eh jeh ny slattagyn lesh 
corranyn-pollal, as gowee eh ersooyl, as giare-
ee eh sheese ny banglaneyn. For afore the 
harvest, when the bud is perfect, and the sour 
grape is ripening in the flower, he shall both cut 
off the sprigs with pruning hooks, and take 
away and cut down the branches. 
s’gyere, a. how sharp. G 
s’gyerey, a. id., comp. and sup. of gyere. G 
s’geayr or s’geir, a. how sour, sharp or tart. 
Isaiah, xviii. 5 [see geayr above]. G 
s’geayrey, a. id., comp. and sup. G 
ro ghyere or ghyeir, a. too sharp, sour, tart; 
sharp edged, strict, acidous. G  
ro yere, a. too sharp, tart, or sour. G 
gyerey, a. pl. sour, sharp, strict.  
geayrey, a. pl. sour, acid.  
geir 
dy gheir, s. of smart or pain. G  
bainney geir, curdled or sour milk. 
feeyn-geir, s. m. vinegar. 
172 
G 
 
gyere, v. sour, &c.; -agh, 77; -e, 80; -ys, 
88.  
geayr, v. make sour or acid; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88.  
gyereaghey, v. souring, sharpening.  
geayraghey, v. making sour or souring.  
dy yereagh or yereaghey, v. to sharpen or 
sour. G 
gyerit. 85. soured, sharpened.  
geayrit, 85, soured.  
ro yereit, s. too sharpened or tart. G 
gyerid, s. m. sourness, sharpness.  
e yereid, s. his sharpness or sourness. G  
geayrid, s. m. sourness, acidity.  
gyersnagh, s. m. a smart; pl. -yn.  
garagh, a. sourish, acrimonious. Only 
made use of when speaking of land. 
geayree. See garee, a sour piece of land.  
garee, s. f. a sour piece of land, (from geayr 
sour). 
gyn, pre. without.  
gyn-dooyt, adv. without doubt.  
gyn-eïe, adv. without meddling, besides. 
Jud. xx. 17: As va earroo cloan Israel, gyn-eïe 
er cloan Venjamin, kiare cheead thousane 
deiney-cliwe. And the men of Israel, beside 
Benjamin, were numbered four hundred 
thousand men that drew sword. 
gyn-grayse, adv. graceless.  
gyn-grunt, adv. bottomless, without 
bottom.  
gyn-lheihys, adv. incurable; 2 Chron. xxi. 
18: As lurg shoh ooilley woaill y Chiarn eh ’sy 
volg lesh doghan gyn-lheihys. And after all this 
the Lord smote gyn-lheihys him in his bowels 
with an incurable disease.  
gyn-loght, adv. without crime or guilt, 
innocent.  
gyn-loghtynid, s. m. guiltlessness.  
gyn-oayl, a. foreign.  
fer gynoayl, s. m. a foreigner. 
gyn-oayltagh, s. m. a foreigner; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
gyn-oayltys, s. m. foreignness.  
gyn-oyr, adv. without cause.  
gyn-tort, a. without thought or 
consideration; s. incircumspection.  
gyn-yss, a. unknown, without knowledge 
of.  
dyn, pre. un[-], without, of the same import 
as gyn.  
dyn-blayst, a. insipid, without taste.  
dyn-yss, a. unknown, without knowing or 
knowledge, by surprise.  
gyrn, v. snarl, grin; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
gyrnal, v. snarling, grinning.  
gys, pre. to, till, until. This is not the word 
used before verbs. See dy. Gys and dys are 
used before other words; dys in colloquial, 
and gys in sacred and solemn.  
dys, pre. to, until, unto; of the same 
meaning as gys.  
gy, pre. to; a contraction of gys.  
173 
H 
 
H 
As H is not a radical initial in the Manks 
language, it is not to be expected that all the 
branch words which might be brought under 
it will appear here; so many, however, are 
inserted as will show how the changes are 
effected. See Remark 14, and also 40, 44, 55, 
56, 69, 139, and 163.  
ha, in. of abhorrence or dislike.  
halley 
ny halley, a. d. of the hall; Luke, xxii. [55] 
As tra v’ad er voaddey aile ayns mean ny 
halley, as er hoie sheese cooidjagh, hoie 
Peddyr sheese ny mast’ oc. And when they had 
kindled a fire in the midst of the hall, and were 
set down together, Peter sat down among 
them.  
hannah, adv. already, before now, heretofore.  
harrish, p. p. over, over him; -in, id. em.  
harrysin, p. p. over him, em. See also 
harrishin. 
harree, p. p. over her; -ish, id. em.  
harroo, p. p. over them; -syn, id. em.  
harrystoo, p. p. over them. See harroo.  
harrym, p. p. over me; -s, id. em.  
harrin, p. p. over us; -yn, id. em.  
harrid or harryd, p. p. over thee; -s, id. 
em.  
harrishdiu, p. p. over you or ye, or harriu, 
p. p. over you or ye; 1. Cor. ix. 12: My ta fir-
ynsee elley er ghoaill y phooar shoh harriu, 
nagh vel eh ny s’cooie dooinyn? If others be 
partakers of this power over you, are not we 
rather? The em. of this and the preceding 
word is -ish.  
harrish y chione, above value. 
hault, v. halt, stand still; 2 Sam. ii. 28: Myr 
shen ren Joab sheidey trumpet, as hault 
ooilley’n pobble, as cha deiyr ad er Israel ny 
sodjey, as va’n caggey ec kione. So Joab blew 
a trumpet, and all the people stood still, and 
pursued after Israel no more, neither fought 
they any more.  
heckyl, s. m. a hackle; pl. -yn.  
heear, a. in the west, western. S  
my-heear, a. westward, to the west. 
heear-ass, a. in the south-west. S  
sheear, s. f. west, westward. 
sheear-ass, s. f. south-west. 
sheear-hwoaie, s. f. north-west. 
neear, a. from the west. Sh  
neear-ass, a. from the south west. Sh  
neear-hwoaie, a. from the north-west. Sh  
heese, adv. down, below  
sheese, adv. down. 
neese, adv. from below, up. It is also used 
when you ask —is the cow dry from milk? 
(vel y vooa neese?) When she is dry the 
word is shast.  
neese sheese, adv. up and down.  
hene, pro. self, own selves.  
pene, pro. self, own. Hene changes to pene 
after the letter m.  
heose, adv. up, above.  
seose, adv. upwards, up.  
neose, adv. from above, down. 
neose seose, adv. down and up.  
heurin, s. a he-goat; pl. -yn.  
hiar, s. east, eastern. See also har. S  
har, s. east; kione-har (eastward); Gen. iii. 
24: Myr shen deiyr eh magh yn dooinney: as 
hoie eh kione-har garey Eden Cherubim, as 
cliwe ailagh va chyndaa er dy chooilley heu, dy 
lhiettal y raad gys billey yn vea. So he drove 
out the man; and he placed at the east of the 
garden of Eden Cherubims, and a flaming 
sword which turned every way, to keep the way 
of the tree of life. S 
my-hiar, a. eastward, to the east. 
shiar, s. east, eastward. Prov. “Giare 
sheear liauyr shiar.” [Short west, long 
east.] 
shiar-ass, s. m. south-east. 
shiar-hwoaie, s. m. north-east. 
niar, s. f. from the east. S  
niar-ass, s. f. from the south-east. S  
niar-hwoaie, s. f. from the north-east. S  
hibbyn, s. ivy; pl. -yn.  
hoal, adv. hence, over, beyond; hoal as noal 
(hence and thence); hoal as wass (over and 
here).  
hoght, s. eight; pl. -yn.  
hoght-cheead, s. eight hundred.  
hoght-jeig, s. eighteen.  
174 
H 
 
hoght-jeig as feed, s. thirty-eight.  
hoghtoo, s. eighth.  
hollyn, s. f. holly.  
hollyn[-]straie, s. f. sea holly, eringo.  
holt, s. m. a hold or grasp. 
holt, v. did [sic] hold or grasp; -agh, 77; 
-ey, 82; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
dy holtal, v. to hold or grasp.  
horlth, v. to call a cow or cattle.  
hug, pre. to. This word is used instead of gys.  
huggey, p. p. to him, unto him; -syn, id. 
em.  
huic, p. p. to her; -ish, id. em. 
hic or huic, p. p. to her; -ish, id. em.  
huc, p. p. to them; -syn, id. em.  
hym, p. p. to me; -s, id. em.  
hympene, p. p. to myself.  
hooin, p. p. to us, let us go. See dooin; -in, 
id. em.  
hood, p. p. to thee; -s, id em.  
hoodhene, p. p. to thyself.  
hiu, p. p. to you or ye; -ish, id. em.  
huggey as veih, adv. hither and thither, to 
and fro.  
hullad, s. f. an owl; pl. -yn.  
hurjuck or hurjucks, adv. away pig, or away 
with thee pig.  
hurley-burley, adv. higgledy-piggledy, 
confusedly.  
hut, in. of dislike.  
hyss, v. to set a dog on any thing; -agh; -in; 
-yms, &c.  
175 
I 
 
I 
This letter is radical in all words under it 
when it is initial, except a few from f.  
ick, uick, or auick, s. f. a creek or gullet. In 
looking over Dr. Borlase’s vocabulary of 
the Cornish language, (which is now nearly 
extinct), I found a word which exactly 
answers to our ghaw, giau, guick or giuag, 
a creek or gullet. There are not less than 
nine places in the south of this Island, the 
names of which end in ick viz. —Fleshick, 
Spoldrick, Parwick. Dressick, Saundrick, 
Grenick, Soderick, Pollick, and Garwick  
-id, s. This, in the Manks is only an ending 
syllable to adjectives, and makes them 
substantives; its meaning is, for the most 
part, the same as the English -ness. See 89, 
&c.  
idlee or idley, s. m. a string. Perhaps from a 
hat string.  
Illiam, s. m. William.  
illish, s. f. the handle or loop in a creel, hand 
basket, or reticule; pl. -yn.  
imbagh, s. m. season; pl. -yn.  
imbee, a. d. of the season or seasons.  
imbaghoil, a. seasonable.  
imbaghoilid, s. m. seasonableness.  
imbea, s. carriage, character, conduct. No 
doubt a contraction of immeeaght-bea.  
imbyl, v. brew; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha n’iml or n’imlee, v. 126. not brew; 
-agh; -in; -ym; -yms, 94. I  
dhimbyl, v. did brew or brewed. I 
dymbyl, v. brewed or did brew. Y.  
gimbyl, v. 61. brewing. I  
er n’imbyl, v. hath, &c. brewed. I  
thie imbyl, s. m. a brew house. 
imlit, 85, brewed.  
imleyder, s. m. a brewer; pl. -yn.  
imlagh, s. the fine of groats.  
imlagh, s. the strange sheep to be turned off.  
imlee, a. humble, not proud.  
ny himlee, s. the humble. I  
s’imlee, a. how humble; comp. and sup. of 
imlee. I 
imlee, v. 
dimlee, v. [did] humble, humbled.  
gimlagh or gimlaghey, v. 6[1]. humbling. 
I 
er ny imlaghey, v. hath, &c. been 
humbled.  
imlit, 85, humbled.  
imleeid, s. m. humbleness, humility.  
e himleeid, s. her humility. I  
imleig, s. f. navel; pl. -yn.  
e hemleig, s. her navel. I [l. himleig ?] 
imman, s. m. a drove; pl. -yn. 
imman, v. drive; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 88; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms; 87; -ys, 88,  
cha n’imman, v. not drive; -agh; -in. I  
dimman, v. did drive, drove. I 
gimman, v. 61. driving. I 
er n’imman, v. hath, &c. driven. I  
e himman, v. her driving. I  
immanit, 85. driven, drove.  
s’immanit, a. how drove or driven. I 
immanagh, s. m. a driver; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee].  
y n’immanagh, s. the driver. I  
lorg-immanagh, s. f. a goad; 
<Ecclesiasticus, xii. 11> [the only Bible 
example is Judges, iii. 31: As ny lurg-syn 
hrog Shamgar, mac Anath, varr jeh ny 
Philistinee  shey cheea[d] dooinney lesh lorg-
immanagh: as ren eshyn myrgeddin livrey 
Israel. And after him was Shamgar the son of 
Anath, which slew of the Philistines six hundred 
men with an ox goad: and he also delivered 
Israel.]  
immee, v. i. go, begone, -agh, 77, &c.  
jim, p. will I go? -s, id. em. The answer in 
the affirmative would be immee; in the 
negative cha jem.  
dimmee, v. departed, did depart or walk 
away, did go. I 
jimmee, v. did go, departed, went. I  
immeeaght, v. going, acting.  
gimmeeaght, v. 6[1]. going; pl. -yn. I 
er n’immeeaght, v. hath, &c. gone, 
departed, gone away. I  
immeeit or immit, 85. gone.  
immyr, s. f. a bed or butt of land, as many 
furrows as are put together between the 
176 
I 
 
ending furrows, a bed of seed in a garden.  
imraghyn, s. pl. lands or beds.  
imnea, s. m. anxiety, solicitude, concern, 
uneasiness for anything; pl. -yn, or -ghyn.  
imneagh, a. anxious, solicitous, uneasy; 
Mat. vi. 25: Ny bee-jee ro-imneagh son nyn 
mea, cre ee-ys, ny cre iu-ys shiu: ny foast son 
nyn girp cre ver shiu miu. Take no thought for 
your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall 
drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put 
on.  
s’imneagh, a. how anxious. I 
s’imneaee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. I 
dy imneagh, adv. anxiously, &c.  
imneays, s. m. anxiousness, anxiety.  
neu-imneays, s. f. insolicitude; inanxiety. 
imraa, v. mention, rehearse, speak of, repeat; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
cha n’imraa, v. not mention or speak of; 
-gh; -ee; -in; -ins, 94. I  
dimraa, v. did mention or express, &c. I 
gimraa, v. 61. mentioning, repeating. I 
imraait, 85. mentioned, spoken. 
s’imraait, a. how often mentioned. I 
neu-imraait, a. unexpressed, unspoken of. 
imraader, s, m. a mentioner, &c.  
y n’imraader s. the mentioner. I  
imshee [‘diabolical, hellish’] 
amshee, s. m. See imshee. [deest] 
MacImshee, s. m. the son of discord or 
false peace. 
inçhyn, s. pl. brains. See also enneeyn.  
ingagh, s. f. a train of nets; pl. 72 [change 
-agh to -eeyn].  
y n’ingagh, s. the train. I  
ingee, a. d. of a train or trains of nets.  
ingan, s. m. an anvil; pl. -yn.  
ingan, s. m. the issue, increase, or offspring 
of sheep, cattle, fowls, &c.; Job, xxxix. 2 
Vod uss goardrail ny meeaghyn t’ad goll; as 
nee foyd’s ta’n traa daue dy ymmyrkey nyn 
ingan? Canst thou number the months that 
they fulfil? or knowest thou the time when they 
bring forth?; pl. -yn.  
ingin, s. f. the nail of a finger or toe, a hoof.  
y n’ingin, s. the nail, the hoof. I  
yngnyn, s. pl. nails, hoofs, or hooves, 
claws, Zech. xi. 16: …agh ee-ys eh feill ny 
roauyree, as raipee eh ny yngnyn oc ayns 
peeshyn. …but he shall eat the flesh of the fat, 
and tear their claws in pieces. 
ingney, a. d. of the nail or nails, or hoof.  
bossan ing[n]ey, s. m. nailwort, or witlow. 
dy ingney, v. to cut with the nails or hoofs.  
dy yngney, v. to cut with hoofs or nails.  
ingnit, 85. cut with nails or hoofs.  
yngnit, 85. cut with hoofs, nails, claws, &c.  
ingyr, s. f. pus, ichor, corrupted matter of a 
sore.  
yngyr, s. f. pus, matter, ichor, corrupted 
matter.  
ingyragh, a. d. of pus or corruption.  
yngyragh, a. d. of pus, matter, &c. See also 
ingyr and ingyragh, &c. 
ingyr, v. 
cha n’ingyr, v. 126. not gather pus, matter, 
or corruption as a sore; -agh; -ee; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms, 94. I  
dhingyr, v. did gather pus, or matter. I 
dyngyr, v. did gather pus, ichor, 
corruption, or matter. Y 
gingyragh or gingyraght, v. 61. gathering 
pus or matter, as a sore. I 
gyngiraght, v. 61. gathering pus or matter, 
festering, hatching some ill. Y 
dy ingyraght, v. to gather pus or matter, to 
fester.  
dy yngyraght, v. to gather pus, matter, &c.  
er n’ingragh, v. hath, &c. gathered pus, 
ichor, matter, &c. I  
yngyrit, 85. gathered, festered.  
ingyragh, a. pussy, ichorous, gathering 
pus.  
injeig, s. f. a pringle, a paddock, a small 
enclosure of land; pl. -yn.  
injeigagh, a. being in pringles, &c.  
injil, a. low, not high.  
s’injil, a. how low. I 
s’injilley or s’<h>ins[h]ley, a. id., comp. 
and sup. I 
b’inshley, a. lowest, lowermost.  
by-sinshley, adv. lowest or lowermost.  
inshley, a. d. of lowness or low; çheu ny 
inshley (the low side).  
injill* or injillee, v. make low, lower; -agh, 
177 
I 
 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 88; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
cha n’injill, or n’injillee, v. not make low 
or abase: -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. I  
cha n’inshl or n’inshlee, v. not lower.  
dinjilee, v. did lower or make low. I 
ginjillaghey, v. 61. lowering, abasing. I  
ginshlaghey, v. 61. humbling, lowering, 
abasing. See also, ginjillaghey, of which 
this is a contraction. I  
dy in[j]illaghey, v. to make or bring low, to 
abase, to subdue, to bring into a state of 
subjection.  
er n’injillaghey, v. hath, &c. made low or 
abased. I  
er n’inshlagh or n’inshlaghey. See er 
n’injillaghey I  
injillit, 85. made low, abased, humbled, 
depressed.  
injillid, s. m. lowness, depression.  
inshlid, s. m. lowness. A corruption of 
injillid.  
innagh, s m. woof or weft. Prov. “Lhig da’n 
innagh lhie er y chione s’jerree.” [Let the 
woof lie at the last end.] 
inneen, s. f. daughter, girl; pl. -yn. 
ny hinneen, s. a daughter; Luke, xiii, 16: As 
nagh lhisagh y ven shoh ta ny hinneen da 
Abraham, ee ta satan er chiangley, cur-my-ner 
ny hoght bleeaney jeig shoh, ve er ny eaysley 
veih yn vondiaght shoh er laa yn doonaght? 
And ought not this woman, being a daughter of 
Abraham, whom Satan hath bound, lo, these 
eighteen years, be loosed from this bond on the 
sabbath day? I  
yn neen, s. the daughter or girl; a 
contraction of inneen. I  
inneenyn mac, s. [pl. ] son[’s] daughters.  
inneenyn inneen, s. pl. daughter[’s] 
daughters.  
inneenyn braar as shuyr, s. brother and 
sister’s daughters. 
inneenyn daa huyr, s. pl. two sisters’ 
daughters.  
inneenyn daa vraar, s. pl. two brothers’ 
daughters.  
eirey inneen, s. f. an heiress. 
liass inneen, s. f. a step daughter. 
inney 
innee, a. d. daughter of, girl of.  
inney-veyl, s. f. a maid or girl that is hired 
for wages, a handmaid; 1 Kings, iii. 20: As 
ren ee girree ec y vean-oie, as ghow ee my 
vac’s veih my lhiattee, tra va dty inney-veyl ny 
cadley, as ghow ee eh ’syn oghrish eck, as hug 
ee yn lhiannoo marroo eck hene ’syn oghrish 
aym’s. And she arose at midnight, and took my 
son from beside me, while thine handmaid 
slept, and laid it in her bosom, and laid her 
dead child in my bosom.  
Innyd, s. f. Lent. See Laa-Innyd.  
Laa-Innyd, s. m. Ash Wednesday, the first 
day of lent; from aoin or oine (a fast); it 
ought to be Laa-Aoinyd (a day of fasting); 
though we have it not for fasting, It is in the 
Erse. 
Oie-Innyd, s. f. the night before Ash 
Wednesday. Prov. “Oie-Innyd bee dty volg 
lane; my jig laa Caisht yiow traast son 
shen.” [On Shrove Tuesday (the eve of the 
fast) thy belly shall be full; before Easter 
day comes thou shalt fast for that.] 
insh, v. tell or announce; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 88; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. Prov. “Nagh insh dou cre va mee, agh 
insh dou cre ta mee.” [Do not tell me what 
I was, but tell me what I am.] 
cha n’insh, v. not tell or announce; -agh; 
-ee; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. I  
dinsh, v. told, did tell. I 
ginsh, v. 61. telling, reporting. I  
inshit, 85. told, announced.  
s’inshit, a. how often told. I 
neu-inshit, a. untold, unannounced. 
insheyder, s. m. a. teller, one who 
announces.  
irr or irree, v. rise; -agh, 77; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. Prov. “Eshyn 
lhieys marish moddee, irrys eh marish 
jarganyn.” [He who lies with dogs will rise 
with fleas.] 
cha n’irr, v. not rise; -agh; -ee, &c. I  
dirr or dirree, v. rose, did rise. I 
jirree, v. did rise, or arose. I 
girree, v. 61. rising, accruing. I 
er n’irree, v. hath, &c. risen.  
girree-magh, v. rising in rebellion.  
irree, s. f. a passion, rising.  
178 
I 
 
irreeyn, s. pl. risings, passions of the mind 
or soul. They are called passions, no doubt, 
on account of their passing in the mind; 
yeearreeyn, no doubt, is from hence.  
irree-magh, s. a rebellion, pl. -yn.  
irree-ny-greinney [s.] m. the rising of the 
sun.  
irree-reesht or irree-seose reesht, s. 
resurrection; Mat. xxii. 31: Agh mychione 
irree-reesht ny merriu, nagh vel shiu er lhaih 
shen va loayrit riu liorish Jee? But as touching 
the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read 
that which was spoken unto you by God? 
Irree-seose; John, xi. 24: Dooyrt Martha rish, 
Ta fys aym dy n’irree eh reesht ec yn irree-
seose ’sy laa jerrinagh. Martha saith unto him, 
I know that he shall rise again in the 
resurrection at the last day.  
irreyder, s. m. a riser; pl. -yn.  
irreyder[-]magh, s. m. a rebel.  
irrit, 85. risen. Obsolete. 
ish, pro. she, her; the em. of ee.  
-it, s. a. postfix of the same import as ed, 
English, and requires to be sounded -iht. 
See 85.  
iu, v. drink, swallow liquid; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha n’iu, v. 126. not drink; -agh. I  
diu, v. drunk, did drink.  
j’ïu, v. did drink, drank. See also diu. I 
giu, v. 61. drinking. I  
er n’iu, pt. hath, &c. drank. I  
iuit or iut, 85. drank, drunk.  
iuder, s. m. a drinker; pl. -yn.  
s’iuit or s’iut, a. how drank up. I 
neu-iuit, a. undr[u]nk. 
iu[-]laynt, s. m. a toast, something said 
before drinking in company; pl. -yn.  
siyn-iu, s. pl. drinking vessels. 
iuoil, a. drinkable, fit to drink.  
neu-iuoil, a. undrinkable. 
iuoilid, s. m. drinkableness, fitness to drink.  
iyn, s. m. a tie on a thievish beast’s forelegs.  
179 
J 
 
J 
For its sound see Remark 16; and for its 
changes see Remark 50. Words that come 
under it from other letters are so marked.  
jaagh, s. f. smoke; pl. -yn or -eynyn. 
dy yaagh, s. of smoke. J  
jaagh, v. id. -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
yaagh, v. did smoke; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. J 
jaaghey, v. smoking.  
dy yaaghey, v. to smoke. J 
jaaghit, 85. smoked.  
ro yaaghit, a. too smoked. J 
jaaghagh, a. smoky.  
s’jaaghagh, a. how smoky. J 
s’jaaghee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. J 
ro yaaghagh, a. too smoky. J  
jaagheyder, s. m. a smoker; pl. -yn.  
jaggad, s. f. a jacket; pl. -yn.  
e yaggid, s. his jacket. J  
jaghee, s. f. tithe, tenth; pl. -nyn.  
e yaghee, s. his tithe. J 
jaghagh, a. titheable.  
jagheeit or jaghit, 85. tithed.  
jagheenys, s. m. tithing.  
e yagheenys, s. his tithing trade. J  
jaghin 
ard-jaghin, s. m. an archdeacon; pl. -yn. 
jalloo, s. m. an idol, an image; pl. -yn. This 
word is sometimes used for nothing; as, 
Cha row jalloo.  
e yalloo, s. his idol or image. J 
jallooagh, a. idolatrous.  
jallooder, s. m. an idolater; pl. -yn.  
ny yallooder, s. an idolater. J  
jalloonys, s. m. idolatry; pl. -syn.  
Jamys, s. m. James.  
e Yamys, s. his James. J  
jarg, v. can or canst, could or couldst; -agh, 
77; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88.  
cha yarg, v. could or couldst not; -agh; -ee; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. J 
jargit er, 85. overcome, subdued.  
jargan, s. f. a flea; pl. -yn. Perhaps it should 
be jerkan, from its leaping.  
e yargan, s. his flea. J  
bossan jargan, s. m. fleawort. 
cadley-jargan, s. m. a sensation of pain 
generally felt in the foot or feet attended 
with slight pricking pains all over the 
member, which is quite torpid at the time. 
[Pins and needles.] Perhaps it ought to be 
written ghallar-jerkan. 
jarganagh, a. pulicose.  
jarganee, s. pl. small worms found in the 
gravel, on the sea shore, and used for bait to 
catch fish.  
jargan-leoighyr, s. m. a lizard.  
jarroo, adv. indeed, in truth, in verity; it is 
often used with dy before it; as, dy jarroo-
firrinagh (indeed, and in verity, or truth); 
Exod. ix. 16: As dy jarroo-firrinagh, er yn eer 
oyr shoh ta mee er dty hroggal seose, dy 
hoilshaghey aynyd my phooar, as dy vod 
m’ennym v’er ny ockley-magh trooid ooilley’n 
theihll. And in very deed for this cause have I 
raised thee up, for to shew in thee my power; 
and that my name may be declared throughout 
all the earth.  
dy jarroo-ta, adv. yes indeed, indeed it is, 
in reality it is so.  
dty yarroo, s. thy indeed. J 
jarrood, v. forget, forgetting; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
jarrood, s. m. a forget; pl. -yn.  
dy yarrood, v. to forget; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. J  
e yarroodey, v. his forgetting. J 
jarroodit, 85.  
s’jarroodit, a. how forgotten. J 
ro yarroodit, a. too forgotten. J 
jarroodeyder, s. m. a forgetter; pl. -yn.  
jarroodagh 
s’jarroodagh, a. how forgetful. J 
s’jarroodee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. J 
ro yarroodagh, a. too forgetful. J 
neu-yarroodagh, a. unforgetful. 
Jasdil or Jasdyl, a. this word is used as an 
adjective after Jerdein, for Ascension-day 
or Holy Thursday. Some will have it that 
Frasdyl is the proper word. If Jasdil is the 
180 
J 
 
correct word it may be from Jee as y 
theihll, as Christ ascended to heaven on that 
day. If Frasdyl, it may be from feaillys 
tooil, as some say it is improper to look or 
gaze as far as you can on that day. It may 
have some reference Acts, i. 11 [the 
Ascension narrative, but the word does not 
occur there]. 
jastan, s. m. a course or row of ling or heather 
laid on the ground from the hand of the 
puller; pl. -yn.  
e yastan. See jastan. J 
jastanagh, a. in courses or rows.  
jastee, s. m. barm, yeast; pl. -yn.  
dy yastee, a. of yeast or barm. J  
jasteeit, 85. barmed, yeasted.  
jatter or jautter, s. m. a debtor; a dealer.  
e yatter, s. his debtor, his dealer with. J 
jatter or jautter, s. m. an author.  
e yatter, s. his author. J 
jea, s. m. yesterday.  
e yea, s. his yesterday. J 
jeadagh, a. diligent, careful, assiduous, 
prudent.  
jeidagh, a. See jead<d>agh.  
ro yeidagh, a. too snug and tidy. J 
neu-yeidagh, a. not assiduous, indiscreet. 
jeadid or jeadys, s. m. diligence, care, 
spruceness.  
jeidid or jeidys. See jeadid.  
e yeidid, s. his tidiness, &c. J 
jeaid, s. m. on an edge, as teeth by eating 
acids.  
e yeaid, s. his sharpness of teeth. J 
er-jeid, a. on edge, as teeth; Jer. xxxi. 30: 
Agh yiow dagh unnane baase son e 
pheccaghyn hene: dy chooilley ghooinney ee-
ys mess soor y villey-feeyney, bee e eeacklyn 
er-jeid. But every one shall die for his own 
iniquity: every man that eateth the sour grape, 
his teeth shall be set on edge. 
jean, v. do, act, make, perform; it is used also 
for have; as, jean myghin orrin, (have 
mercy on us). Prov. “Jean traagh choud as 
ta’n ghrian soilshean.” [Make hay while 
the sun shines.] 
jean-jee, p. do ye or you.  
jin or jinn*, v. do, perform, &c.; -agh, 77; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87. See 
also jean.  
jeannagh, v. See jinnagh [deest].  
my yinnin, v. if I would, &c. do; -s, id. em. 
J 
my yinnagh, v. if would or wouldst do. J 
jannoo, v. doing, making, make, &c. 
acting, practising.  
dy yannoo, v. to do, act, make, &c. J  
er n’yannoo, v. hath, &c. done, made, 
performed.  
drogh-yannoo or -yantys, s. m. evil 
doings. 
jeant, 85. done, finished, performed, acted, 
made, rendered.  
s’jeant, a. how done or performed. J 
jeant-magh, v. endued, made out. 
neu-yeant, a. undone, unmade. 
nee’m or neeym, p. I will; -s, id. em.  
nee, v. will or wilt, will or wilt do.  
nym. See nee’m.  
ne’oo, p. thou wilt; -s, id. em.  
ren, v. did, didst; the preterit of jean. 
jeantagh, s. m. a doer, actor, maker, 
performer, &c.; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]. 
drogh yantagh, s. a sinner, an evil doer or 
actor, a transgressor; pl. 71. J 
drogh-yantagh, s. m. an evil doer, a sinner. 
drogh yeantagh, s. an evil doer, a sinner. 
Though this word is more analogous; yet, 
see drogh-yantagh. J  
jeantagh, a. 
s’jeantagh, a. how diligent. J 
s’jeantee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. J 
jeayst, s. a joist; H[a]b. ii. 11: Son nee’n 
chlagh geamagh uss y voalley, as nee’n jeayst 
mastey’n fuygh freggyrt eh. For the stone shall 
cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the 
timber shall answer it; pl. -yn.  
jeaist, s. f. a joist. See jeayst. 
Jecrean, s. Wednesday, (dies Mercurii), the 
day dedicated by the heathen to Mercury, 
the day of Mercury.  
e Yecrean, s. his Wednesday. J 
Jedoonee, s. f. (Jedomini, dies dominica), the 
Lord’s day, the Sabbath. This was the day 
dedicated by the heathen to the sun—
181 
J 
 
Sunday, as the English name shows.  
e Yedoonee, s. his Lord’s day or Sunday. J 
jee, pro. (added to verbs), ye or you, as 
jean-jee (do ye); tar-jee (come ye); gow-jee 
(go ye or take ye).  
Jee, s. m. God, the creator and upholder of all 
things; pl. -aghyn.  
dty Yee, s. thy God. J 
jeeghyn, s. pl. gods; jeegh[y]n jalloo (idol 
gods).  
e yeeghyn, s. his idol gods. J 
anjee, s. m. an atheist. 
anjeeagh, a. atheistical. 
ben-jee, s. f. a goddess; “yn ven jee,” Acts, 
xix. 37: Son ta shiu er chur lhieu kionfenish ny 
deiney shoh, nagh vel edyr roosteyryn dy 
hiambyllyn, ny foast er loayrt goan mollaghtagh 
noi yn ven-jee eu. For ye have brought hither 
these men, which are neither robbers of 
churches, nor yet blasphemers of your 
goddess. 
goo-Yee, s. m. the word of God, the 
Scripture. 
çhingey-jee, s. f. 5. a ringworm; pl. 
çhingaghyn-jee. 
yn Jeeys, s. m. the Deity, the Godhead.  
e Yeeys, s. his Godhead. J 
jeeoil, a. divine, god like. This, and the two 
words following, I have never seen nor 
heard, but as the language stands in need of 
them, and the words purely Manks and 
appropriate, I have inserted them.  
jeeoilagh, s. m. a divine, a theologian; pl. 
71 [change -agh to -ee].  
jeeoilys, s. m. divinity, theology.  
jeeagh, v. look, examine by sight, show, visit; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
jeeagh, in. look, see, behold.  
yeeagh, v. did look, show, showed or 
appeared; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 
94. J 
jeeaghyn, v. looking, showing, seeming.  
dy yeeaghyn, v. to look; visit, or show. J 
jeeaghit, 85. looked, shown, exhibited.  
s’jeeaghit, a. how much shown or looked 
at. J 
ro yeeaghit, a. too looked on or shown. J 
jeeagheyder, s. m. a looker, a spectator, 
one that looks.  
jeean, a. earnest, fervent, zealous, sudden.  
s’jeean, a. how fervent or ardent, how 
much in earnest, in a hurry. J 
s’jeeaney or s’jeeanney, a. id., comp. and 
sup.; Mark, xiv. 31: Agh loayr eshyn ny 
s’jeeanney, Dy beign dy gholl gy-baase mayrt, 
cha nobbin oo er coontey erbee. But he spake 
the more vehemently, If I should die with thee, I 
will not deny thee in any wise. J 
dy jeean, adv. hastily, earnestly, suddenly.  
ro yeean, a. too earnest, zealous or fervent. 
J 
neu-yeean, a. not zealous. 
jeeanid, s. m. earnestness, fervor, zeal.  
e yeeanid, s. his earnestness, zeal, ardency. 
J 
jeear 
mwing-jeear, s. m. a horse halter; pl. -yn. 
jeear, s. (from eearree), the desire, on oath by 
the desire.  
jeeas, s. f. an ear or head of corn.  
e yeeas, s. his ear or head of corn. J 
jeetdrym-jeeas, s. f. the herb horse tail. 
jeish 
my-yeish, a. in ear, out of the blade. 
jeeassagh 
s’jeeassagh, a. how full of ears or heads of 
corn. J 
s’jeeassee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. J 
jeeassyragh, v. cleaning, gathering ears or 
heads or corn.  
dy yeeassyrraght, v. to glean, to gather 
ears or heads of corn. J 
jeeasseyder or jeeasserey, s. m. a gleaner; 
pl. -yn.  
jeebin, s. f. a deeping of nets, net.  
e yeebin, s. his deeping of nets. J 
jeebinagh, a. d. of network.  
s’jeebinagh, a. how full of net work. J 
s’jeebinee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58, J 
ro yeebinagh, a. too much deepings, too 
much in mesh or net work. J 
jeebinys 
e yeebinys, s. his net or mesh work. J 
jeeg, s. f. Luke xiv. 5: Quoi j’iu vees dow ny 
assyl echey er huittym ayns jeeg, nagh jean 
182 
J 
 
jeeragh y hayrn ass eh er y doonaght? Which 
of you shall have an ass or an ox fallen into a 
pit, and will not straightway pull him out on the 
sabbath day?; jeeig, 2 Sam. xx. 15, a ditch, 
a moat, or drain: As haink ad, as chruinnee ad 
stiagh eh [Sheba] ayns Abel jeh Beth-maachah, 
as hrog ad yrjid noi’n ard-valley, as lhieen eh yn 
jeeig, as chleiy ooilley’n pobble va marish Joab 
fo’n voalley dy lhieggal eh. And they came and 
besieged him in Abel of Bethmaachah, and 
they cast up a bank against the city, and it 
stood in the trench: and all the people that were 
with Joab battered the wall, to throw it down; 
pl. -yn or -inyn.  
e yeeig, s. his ditch or drain. J  
jeeigey 
tuig-y-yeeigey, s. f. the twig of the ditch, 
called or corrupted by some to treebey-
yeeigey, the twig of sallix or sally that 
grows spontaneously in marshy places. 
jeeig, v. drain, ditch; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
84; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
yeeig, v. did ditch or drain; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. J 
jeeigey, v. draining, ditching, tilting. 
dy yeeigey, v. drain or make ditches; to tilt 
a cask. J 
jeeigit, 85. drained, ditched, tilted.  
ro yeeigit, a. too drained or ditched. J  
jeeigey, s. m. a hollow or bend in, as a 
hollow or bend in the ridge of a house, the 
back of an animal, &c.; pl. 67 [change -ey 
to -aghyn]. 
jeeigeyder, s. m. a drainer or maker of 
ditches.  
e yeeigeyder, s. his drainer, &c. J 
jeeigagh, a. having ditches or drains.  
s’jeeigagh, a. how full of ditches. J 
s’jeeigee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. J 
ro yeeigagh, a. too full of ditches, &c. J 
jeeigean, s. f. a rill, a very small stream of 
water.  
e yeeigean, s. his small ditch or rill, J 
jeeigeanagh, a. having rills or small 
streams.  
ro yeeigeanagh, a. too full of small ditches 
drains or rills of water. J  
jeeill or jeell, s. f. havoc, waste, destruction, 
trespass, desolation; Micah, iv. 11: Nish 
myrgeddin ta ymmodee ashoonee chaglit dt’oï, 
ta gra, lhig dooin jeeill y yannoo ayn-jee, as 
lhig da’n sooill ain jeeaghyn er Zion. Now also 
many nations are gathered against thee, that 
say, Let her be defiled, and let our eye look 
upon Zion. 
jeeill or jeell, v. commit<ting> havoc or 
waste; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
yeel, v. did havoc or waste; -agh; -in: -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. J 
jeellal or jeelley, v. committing havoc, 
waste or trespass.  
dy yeelal, v. to make havoc, &c. J 
jeellit, 85. worried, mangled, dirtied.  
s’jeeillit, a. how worried, mangled, what 
havock done to. J 
ro yeelit, a. too much made havoc of, 
wasted dirtied, &c. J  
jeelleyder, s. m. one that commits havoc, 
&c.  
e yeeleyder, s. his damager or waster. J 
jeelt, s. f. a saddle; pl. -yn.  
jeelt ben, a woman’s saddle.  
jeelt lhiattagh, a side saddle.  
jeelt eairkagh, a horned saddle.  
jeelt, v. saddle; -agh, 77; -al, 79, or -ey, 82; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
yeelt, v. did saddle or saddled; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. J  
dy yeeltal or yeeltey, v. to saddle. J  
jeeltit, 85. saddled, covered with a saddle.  
s’jeeltit, a. how saddled. J 
ro yeeltit, a. too saddled. J 
jeelteyr, s. m. a saddler; pl. -yn.  
e yeelteyr, s. his saddler. J  
jeelym, s. m. any thing that is lost in the 
gathering, as corn when reaping or 
stacking; drops from a vessel on bringing a 
liquid; a remnant; Jer. xlvii. 5: Ta Gaza er 
n’aase meayl; ta Askelon er ny yiarey jeh 
marish jeelym ny glionney: caïd nee oo lhottey 
oo hene? Baldness is come upon Gaza; 
Ashkelon is cut off with the remnant of their 
valley: how long wilt thou cut thyself?; pl. -yn.  
markym-jeelym, s. m. the shaking or 
vibration of the sun shine on the ground on 
a hot sun shiny day. 
183 
J 
 
jeen, a. stanch from leak, drop dry, a house is 
said to be so that takes no rain in  
[‘watertight’]. 
s’jeen, a. how drop dry, how tight from 
leak. J 
s’jeeney, a. id., com. and sup. J 
ro yeen, a. too stanch from rain or leak. J  
jeenagh, s. m. the rinsing of the milking 
vessels, after the milk has been drained.  
e yeenagh, s. his rinsing of the milking 
vessels. J 
moo[i]r[-]jeenagh, a. murky, dark, 
gloomy, of a sea colour, cloudy, looking for 
rain, watery. 
jeenys, s. f. a wedge; pl. -syn. 
e yeennys, s. his wedge; pl. -syn. J  
jeenys, v. wedge; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
yeennys, v. did wedge; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. J 
jeenysey or jeenysal, v. wedging, &c.  
dy yeennysey, v. to wedge. J 
jeenysit, 85. wedged.  
s’jeenyssit, a. how wedged. J 
ro yeennysit, a. too wedged. J  
jeer* or jeeree, v. make straight; -agh, 77; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
jeeree, v. straighten, make straight.  
yeer* or yeeree, v. did straighten; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. J  
jeeraghey, v. straighten, &c.  
dy yeeraghey, v. to straighten. J  
jeerit, 85. straightened, made straight.  
ro yeerit, a. too straightened. J 
jeereyder, s. m. a straightener; pl. -yn.  
e yeereyder, s. his straightener. J  
jeerid, s. m. straightness, directness, 
uprightness.  
jeerys, s. m. justice, right, equity.  
e yeerid or yeerys, s. his straightness or 
uprightness. J  
neu-yeerys, s. f. injustice, iniquity, 
crookedness. 
jeeragh, a. straight, direct.  
s’jeeragh, a. how straight or direct. J 
s’jeeree, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. J 
anjeeragh, a. not straight. Notwithstanding 
the etymology given under the word 
oainjyr, I hesitate not to say that oainjyragh 
came from this.  
neu-yeeragh, a. indirect, not fair, not 
straight. 
jees, a. two. This is the two used in counting 
no doubt a corruption of daas.  
e yees, s. his two. J  
jees-as-feed, a. twenty-two or two and 
twenty.  
jees-as-daeed, a. two and forty. 
ny-neesht, a. the two, the both [i.e. nyn 
nyees].  
neesht, adv. besides, also, too; ro too, is 
nearly syn. T[’]eh shoh neesht ro veg (this 
also is too little); -agh, id. em. 
jeestyr, v. 
yeestyr, v. did creak; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. J 
jeestyrnee, v. creaking, as the creaking of 
tough wood on breaking, or a new saddle or 
new shoes on being wrought. 
dy yeestyrnee, v. to creak, &c. J 
jeetdrym-jeeas, s. f. the herb horse tail.  
jeh 
yeh, (from jeh), of; yn derrey ye[h] (the 
either one of). J 
jeh, pre. of; adv. off.  
jeh, p. p. of him; -syn, id. em.  
jeh-hene, p. p. of himself, of itself, 
spontaneous.  
j’ee, p. p. of her; as, te j’ee, (it is of her); 
-ish, id. em.  
jeu, p. p. of them, of those, these; -syn, id, 
em.  
jeem, p. p. of me; -s, id. em.  
jeempene, p. p. of myself.  
jin, p. p. of us; -yn or jeeyn, id. em.; Gen. 
iii. 22: Cur-my-ner ta’n dooinney myr-yien er 
jeet dy ve myr unnane jinyn, dy toiggal mie as 
sie. Behold, the man is become as one of us, to 
know good and evil.  
jeed, p. p. of thee; -s; id. em.  
jeedhene, p. p. of thyself.  
j’iu, p. p. of ye or you; perhaps a 
contraction of jeh-shiu; Gen. xxxiv. 15: Agh 
shoh myr choardys mayd riu: My vees shiuish 
myr ta shinyn, dy bee dy chooilley mac 
dooinney jiu er ny yiarey chymmylt. But in this 
will we consent unto you: If ye will be as we be, 
184 
J 
 
that every male of you be circumcised.  
jeh-chash, a. wild, unruly. The metaphor in 
this word is no doubt taken from jeh, (of), 
and chash, or chosh (of the feet); a horse or 
other unruly beast that rears its feet off the 
ground. 
jeh-raie, a. ungovernable, hard to deal 
with.  
jeh-shen, p. of that, thereof.  
jeh-voylley, p. dispraise, censure, 
dishonour.  
cur jeh 
cur-jee’d, v. undress, put off thee; cur-
jee’d dty eaddagh, put off thy clothes. 
Jeheiney s. m. Friday; (dies veneris), the day 
of Venus as the heathens dedicated it; pl. 
67 [change -ey to -aghyn].  
e Yeheiney, s. his Friday. J 
Jeheiney-Cheays or Jeheiney Chaisht, s. 
m. Good Friday; the Cheays or Chaisht is 
from Casherick, no doubt.  
jeï, p. coming after, behind.  
jei shoh; adv. henceforth.  
my yeï, adv. after me, abaft me. J 
ny yeï, p. p. after him, behind him.  
ny-jeï, p. p. abaft or behind them, after 
them or us.  
ny-yeih, adv. nevertheless, 
notwithstanding.  
yeih. See ny yeih. 
jeidey 
geidey or rather jeidey, s. m. a godfather, a 
man who stands sponser for a child at the 
baptismal font.  
e gheidey, s. his godfather; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn]. G.  
jeigh, v. shut, close up; -agh, 77; -ee, 80.  
yeigh, v. did shut; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. J  
dy yeigh, v. to shut. J 
jeight 
s’jeight, a. how shut or closed. J 
ro yeight, a. too shut. J 
neu-yeight, a. unshut. 
jeighder, s. m. a shutter; pl. -yn.  
e yeigheyder, s. his shutter. J 
jeih, a. ten; jeih as feed (thirty); pl. -yn.  
e yeih, s. his ten. J 
dy yheih, a. of ten; Psl. xxxiii. 2: Moylley-
jee yn Chiarn lesh y chlaasagh: gow-jee 
arraneyn-moyllee da lesh y lute, as y ghreïe-
chiaull dy yheih strengyn. Praise the Lord with 
harp: sing praises unto him with the lute, and 
instrument of ten strings. J 
jeih as daeed, a. fifty, or ten and forty. 
jeih thousanyn as feed, a. thirty thousand. 
The jeig in this number [‘jeih thousaneyn 
jeig as feed’] must be wrong in Num. xxxi. 
45.  
jeihoo, a. tenth.  
e yeihoo, s. tenth. J 
jeig, a. [-]teen, a postfix used after ten to 
twenty.  
jeigoo, a. [-]teenth; a posftix to ordinals 
from ten to twenty.  
jeir, s. tear, tears. This word is alike in sing. 
and pl. , except the diaeresis ï is used in the 
pl., as, jeïr; for a few tears we say pl. -yn.  
e yeir, s. his tear; pl. yeïr. J  
jeirree, a. d. of tears, as in the phrase, ayns 
y doo as y jeirree (in blackness of tears).  
e yeirree, a. d. of his tears. J 
jeirk, s. m. an alm; pl. -yn. 
jeirk, v. beg; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87.  
e yeirk, s. [his] alm[s]; pl. -yn. J  
yeirk, s. did give alms; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. J 
jeirkit, 85. given in alms.  
ro yeirkit, a. too given in alms. J 
jeirkagh, s. m. a beggar, a pauper, a 
receiver of alms; pl. 71 [change -agh to 
-ee]. 
e yeirkagh, s. his beggar; pl. 71. J 
jeirkeydagh, s. m. an almoner, a giver of 
alms; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]. 
e yeirkeydagh, s. his giver of alms or 
almoner. 
jeirkid, s. m. beggary, paupery.  
e yeirkid, s. his beggary. J 
jeirkys, s. m. a collection of alms.  
Jelhein or Jelune, s. m. Monday; (dies 
Lunae), the day dedicated to the moon, the 
moon’s day.  
e Yelhein or Yelhuin, s. his Monday. J  
Lhein or Lheiun, s. Monday; as, Doonaght 
as Lheiun (Sunday and Monday). 
185 
J 
 
jelliu, v. warp, warping; -agh, 77.  
yelliu, v. did warp a web; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. J 
jelliuit (sic: stress), 85. warped.  
ro yelliuit, s. too warped. J 
jelliuder (sic: stress), s. m. one who warps; 
pl. -yn.  
e yelliuder, s. his warper; pl. -yn. J  
Jemayrt, s. m. Tuesday; (dies Martius), the 
day dedicated to Mars, the day of Mars.  
e Yemayrt, s. his Tuesday. J 
Jerdein or Jerdune, s. m. Thursday; (dies 
Joves), Jupiter’s day, or the day dedicated 
to Jupiter.  
e Yerdein, s. his Thursday. J 
jerk, v. expect, hope; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87.  
yerk* or yerkee, v. did expect, trust, or 
hope; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. J  
dy yerkal, v. to expect, trust, or hope. J 
jerkit, 85. expected, hoped.  
ro yerkit, a. too expected or hoped. J 
neu-yerkit, a. unexpected. 
jerkeyder, s. m. an expecter; pl. -yn,  
e yerkeyder, s. his expecter. J  
jerkalys, s. m. expectation, hope; pl. -syn.  
e yerkallys, s. his expectation, &c. J 
jerlyn, s. f. darnel; pl. -yn.  
dy yerlyn, a. of darnel. J 
jerrey, s. m. end, conclusion, hinder ends. [pl. 
67: change -ey to -aghyn]. 
gerrey, s. m. the end; Psl. lxxvii. 8: Vel e 
vyghin dy slane er n’immeeaght son dy bragh: 
as vel e yialdyn er jeet dy bollagh gys gerrey 
brâ? Is his mercy clean gone for ever: and his 
promise come to an end for evermore? I 
suppose the G in this word is a mistake. See 
jerrey.  
e yerrey, s. his end, his last, his hinder 
ends; pl. 67. J  
er-jerrey, adv. lastly, in line, latterly, 
behind, not in front. 
fy-yerrey, adv. lastly, at last, finally, in 
fine. 
fey-yerrey, adv. at last, lastly, finally. See 
also fy. 
fy-yerrey-hoal, adv. at long last, &c. 
jerree, a. d. of hindmost or last.  
s’jerree or s’tierree, a. the last, the latest. J 
e yerree, s. his hindmost or last; as, fy-
yerree (at last, lastly, finally). J 
jerrinagh, a. dernier, last; a. d. of or 
belonging to the latter end.  
s’jerrinagh, a. how much tending to the 
last or latter end. J 
s’jerrinee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. J 
yerrinagh, a. d. of the last or latter; as, 
lhiabbee-yerrinagh (of the death-bed, or the 
bed that ends, or is final); Mat. xii. 45: …as 
ta stayd yerrinagh yn dooinney shen ny 
s’doogh na’n toshiaght. …and the last state of 
that man is worse than the first. J. 
Jesarn, s. Saturday; (dies Saturni), the day 
dedicated to Saturn, Saturn’s day.  
e Yesarn, s. his Saturday. J 
Sarn, s. m. a contraction of Jesarn, 
Saturday.  
Harn, s. (from Sarn) Saturday; Prov. Ta 
eayst Harn sy Vayrnt dy liooar ayns 
shiaght bleeaney. [A Saturday’s moon in 
March is enough for seven years.] S 
jesh, a. right, proper, suitable, neat, nice.  
s’jesh, a. how right, becoming, suitable or 
proper. J 
s’jeshey, a. id., comp. and sup. J 
laue yesh, a. right hand. J  
ro yesh, a. too right, proper, suitable, &c. J 
neu-yesh, a. improper, unbecoming, 
unsuitable, unseemly, inapplicable, 
awkward. 
jeshey, a. pl. right, suitable, proper, neat.  
jeshid, s. m. propriety, suitableness.  
jeshaght, s. an instrument, implement.  
e yeshaght, s. his implement, instrument, 
or utensil. J  
jeshal, s. f. water agrimony, water hemp.  
jesheen (sic: stress), s. m. an ornament, 
garnish, or embellishment; pl. -yn.  
e yesheen, s. his ornament, &c. J 
yesheen, v. did ornament, embellish; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. J 
jesheeney, v. 
dy yesheeney, v. to adorn, embellish, &c. J 
ro yesheenit, a. too ornamented, &c. J 
jesheeneyder, s. m. one who ornaments.  
jesheenys, s m. trimmings, embellishments; 
186 
J 
 
pl. -yn.  
e yesheenys, s. his ornamenting, &c. J 
jesheenagh 
ro yesheenagh, a. too ornamental, too 
decorated, or set off. J 
jeushan, s. f. a hinge; pl. -yn.  
e yeushan, s. his hinge. J  
jeushanagh, a. having hinges.  
ro yeushanagh, a. having too many hinges. 
J 
jeushanit, 85. hinged.  
s’jeushanit, a. how hinged. J 
ro yeushanit, a. too hinged. J 
jeyd, s. m. dad, dada, or daddy. 
dty yeyd, s. thy dad, dadda, or daddy. J 
[jiarg]<jaids>, a. red[,] ruddy.  
s’jiarg, a. how red. J 
s’jiargey, a. id., comp. and sup. J 
j[ia]rgey, a. pl. red[,] ruddy.  
yiargey, a. pl. red. J 
jiarg[-]rooisht, [a.] stark naked.  
feeyn-jiarg, s. m. red wine. 
gorrym-jiarg, s. purple. 
jiarg* or jiargee, v. redden, make red; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84.  
yiarg* or yiargee, v. did redden; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. J 
yirgee, v. did or didst redden. See also 
yiargee. J 
jiargagh or jiargaghey, v. reddening, 
blushing, becoming red.  
dy yiargagh or yiargaghey, v. to redden. J  
jiargit, 85, made red, reddened.  
ro yiargit, a. made too red or reddened. J 
jiargeyder, s. m. one that makes red.  
e yiargeyder, s. his reddener. J 
jirgid, s. m. redness; Mat. xvi. 2: Tra ta’n 
fastyr er, jir shiuish, Bee emshyr aalin ayn: son 
dy vel jirgid ’syn aer. When it is evening, ye 
say, It will be fair weather: for the sky is red.  
e yirgid, s. his redness. J 
jiass [‘south’] 
my yiass, adv. southward., to the south. 
jiassid 
e yiassid, a. his southernness. J 
jing, v. jam, throng, press; -agh. 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86.  
ying, v. did jam, cram, throng, press, 
rushed; Acts, xix. 29: As va ooilley yn ard-
valley bun-ry-skyn: as erreish daue v'er ghoaill 
Gaius as Aristarchus, Macedonianee, 
sheshaghyn troailtee Phaul, ying ad stiagh 
ooilley dy cheilley ayns y theater. And the 
whole city was filled with confusion: and having 
caught Gaius and Aristarchus, men of 
Macedonia, Paul's companions in travel, they 
rushed with one accord into the theatre; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. J 
jingey, v. pressing, thronging, &c.  
dy yingey, v. to jam, cram, throng, rush, 
press, &c, &c. J 
jingit 
s’jingit, a. how pressed or thronged. J 
ro yingit, a. too crammed, stuffed, &c. J  
neu-yingit, a. unpressed. 
jingeyder, s. m.  
e yingeyder, s. his rusher, presser, &c. J 
jingleyr, s. m. a jangler; pl. -yn.  
jingleyrys, s. m. a jangling.  
jinnair, s. m. dinner; pl. -yn 
dty yinnair, s. thy dinner. J  
jinnairagh, a. d. of dinner.  
yinnairagh, a. d. of dinner or dinners. J 
jiole, v. suck, sucking; -agh, 77.  
yiole, v. did suck or sucked; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. J 
jiolit or jiolt, 85. sucked.  
s’jiolit or s’jiolt, a. how sucked. J 
ro yiolit, a. too sucked. J 
jioleyder, s. m. one that sucks, a sucker.  
e yioleyder, s. his sucker. J 
jioold, v. discard, cast off, dismis[s], th[ru]st 
out; -agh, 77; -ee, 83.  
yioold or yioolt, v. [did] discard, turn off, 
cast off, or dismiss; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. J  
dy yiooldey, v. to discard or cast off, to 
dismiss on account of disgust or aversion. J 
jiooldit, 85. turned off by dislike.  
s’j[i]oo<i>ldit, a. how discarded or turned 
off. J 
ro yiooldit, a. too discarded, &c. J 
jiool[d]eyder, s. m. a discarder, &c.  
e yiooldeyder, s. his discarder, &c. J  
jiooldagh, a. disgustful, cloyish, raising 
nauseousness in the stomach, raising dislike 
by some offensive action.  
187 
J 
 
s’j[i]oo<i>ldagh, a. how disgustful or 
nauseous. J 
s’j[i]oo<i>ldee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. 
J 
ro yiooldagh, a. too cloyish or apt to turn 
on the stomach. J 
jirkin, s. m. a coatee or short jacket; pl. 
[deest]. 
e yirkin, s. his jacket or coatee. J 
jishig, s. m. papa, father; pl. -yn.  
dty yishig, s. thy papa, thy father, 
colloquially. J 
liass yishig, s. m. a step father. 
jysick, s. father. See jishig.  
jiu, s. m. to day, this day.  
jiulean or jiuleanagh, s. m. a sojourner, a 
person that stays but a day or two, as the 
word would indicate, a cotler, or tenant.  
e yiulean, s. his sojourner; pl. -ee [of 
jiuleanagh]. J 
ro yiuleanagh, a. too sojourner-like, too 
cotter or tenant-like. J 
jiuleanys, s. m. sojourning, cotlery, living 
as not at home. 
joan, s. m. dust, any dry thing pulverised to 
powder or dust; pl. -yn. 
joan, v. dust; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84.  
yoan, v. did dust or dusted; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94, J 
joaney, v. dusting.  
dy yoaney, v. to dust. J 
joanit, 85. dusted, powdered.  
s’joanit, a. how dusted. J 
ro yoanit, a. too dusted. J  
joaneyder, s. m, a duster; pl. -yn.  
e yoaneyder, s. his duster. J 
joanagh 
s’joanagh, a. how dusty. J 
s’joanee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. J 
ro yoanagh, a. too dusty. J  
joanlagh, s. m. dust of rain, mizzling or 
drizzling rain; pl. 72 [change -agh to 
-eeyn].  
dy yoanlagh, s. of misling or drizzling rain. 
J 
joanlaghey, v. 
dy yoanlaghey, v. to missle or drizzle rain. 
J 
joarey 
toshiagh-jioarey, s. m. a coroner or sheriff, 
a man sworn under the crown or king to 
cite before judges, hold inquests, execute 
writs, executions, &c. The etymology of 
this word, like many other, is hard to find; 
the Scotch Gaelic has taoiseach for a 
chieftain, the Irish have the same word for 
chieftain and captain, from either or both it 
may have been derived; but whence the 
joarey or joaree which is added ? Is it a 
corruption of jeh-ree (of the king), or fo-ree 
(under the king), and changed to jo-ree or 
jo-rey? 
joarree, s, m. a stranger; pl. -yn.  
ny yoarree, s. a stranger. J 
joarree, a. strange, remarkable, outlandish; 
Neh. xiii. 26: Nagh ren Solomon ree Israel 
peccah liorish ny reddyn shoh? ga, mast’ 
ymmodee ashoonyn cha row ree goll rishyn, va 
graih ec e Yee er, as ren Jee eh ny ree harrish 
Israel: ny-yeih, eer eshyn ren mraane joarree y 
chleayney gys peccah. Did not Solomon king of 
Israel sin by these things? yet among many 
nations was there no king like him, who was 
beloved of his God, and God made him king 
over all Israel: nevertheless even him did 
outlandish women cause to sin.  
s’joa[r]ree, a. how strange. J 
ro yoarree, a. too strange. J 
joarreeaght or joarreeys, s. m. 
estrangement, strangeness, a foreign or 
strange place.  
e yoarreeaght, s. his strange or foreign 
place. J 
e yoarreeys, s. his estrangement. J 
jok, v. 
yok, v. yoke; -agh; -ee; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms -ys, 94. J  
jokal, s. m. a yoking, what a team can do at 
once whilst yoked together.  
daa yokal, s. two yokings. J  
dy yokal, v. to yoke. J  
jokit 
v’eh yokit, 85. he was yoked. J 
jolg, s. f. a thorn; one of a set of knitting 
needles.  
e yolg, s. his thorn or knitting needle. J 
jilg, s. pl. thorns; knitting needles; the pl. of 
188 
J 
 
jo[l]g.  
dy yilg, s. of thorns; of knitting needles. J 
jolgagh, a. thorny, full of thorns.  
jolg-vrasnee, s. f. some will have it that 
this is the proper Manks for spur; pl. jilg. 
jollys, s. f. voracity, ravenousness.  
e yollys, s. his voracity or greediness. J 
jollyssagh, a. ravenous, gluttonous, 
immoderately fond of food, or in the 
gratification of any sensual desire.  
ro yollyssagh, a. too voracious, greedy, too 
ravenous; s. a ravenous person; pl. 71. 
s’jollyssagh, a. how ravenous or 
immoderately eager after any sensual 
gratification. J 
s’jollyssee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. J 
jollyssagh, s. m. a r[a]venous person or 
beast; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
jollyssid. See jollys.  
joltagh, v. traversing; Jer. ii. 23: Jeeagh 
reesht gys dty raad ’sy choan, cooinee er shen 
t’ou er n’yannoo: t’ou myr dromedaree bieau 
joltagh er y raad. See thy way in the valley, 
know what thou hast done: thou art a swift 
dromedary traversing her ways.  
joltee, a. hasty, rash.  
Jonee or Joney, s. f. Judith.  
jonse, s. m. a jolt, or wince.  
jonse, v. 
yons* or yonse, v. did jolt or wince; -agh; 
-in; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. J 
jonseragh, v. wincing, acting in a wild and 
untamely manner, said of a horse that 
winces.  
dy yonseragh, v. to jolt or wince. J 
jonsit 
ro yonsit, a. too much jolted or winced. J 
jonseyder 
e yonseyder, s. his wincer, &c. J 
jooigh, a. this and jollyssagh are nearly syn. 
but with this difference, that jooigh is only 
to be applied to eagerness of appetite, 
jollyssagh to that and all other intemperate 
desires.  
s’jooigh, a. how voracious or greedy. J 
s’jooighey, a. id., comp. and sup. J 
ro yooigh, a. too greedy. See jooigh. J  
yooighey, a. pl. greedy; as, moddee 
yooighey (greedy dogs). J 
jooid, s. f. greediness, eagerness of 
appetite.  
e yooid, s. his eagerness of appetite. J 
jooighid. See jooid.  
jough, s. f. drink. The Manks here surpasses 
the English, as that language has only the 
one word for verb and noun; the Manks 
verb of drink is iu; pl. -yn, or -inyn.  
dy yough, s. of drink. J 
beggan-jou-ee-ort, a bad wish; it either 
means too little drink, or too little appetite. 
jouish, s. f. shears; pl. -yn.  
e youish, s. his shears. J 
joushag, s. f. a sharper, a termagant; pl. -yn. 
jouyl, s. m. devil. The j from jee and ouyl 
from dewil cruel, the cruel or evil god. The 
English I supposed to be formed in like 
manner, d from dia or deus, and evil added, 
the evil or bad god; diabolus, &c.  
y youyl, s. [the] devil. J 
jouyil, s. pl. devils, diabolians.  
dy youyil, s. pl. of devils. J 
jouyllagh, a. devilish, diabolical.  
s’jouyllagh, a. how devilish or diabolical J 
s’jouyllee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. J 
ro youyllagh, a. too devilish or diabolical. 
J 
jou[y]llid, s. m. devilishness, devilment.  
joyn, v. join; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83.  
yoyn, v. did join or joined; -agh. -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. J 
joynal, v. joining.  
dy yoynal, v. to join. J  
joynit, 85. joined. 
ro yoynit, a. too joined. J 
joyneyder, s. m. a joiner; pl. -yn. 
juail or juailys, deprivation, total loss.  
dy yuail, s. of deprivation or loss. J  
er yuail, v. hath, &c., deprived or lost. J 
Juan, s. m. the familiar of John.  
Yuan, s. John, voc. of Juan. J 
Juan-mooar, s. m. the black -backed gull.  
Juan-teayst, s. m. the jack-daw.  
jummal, v. wasting, destroying, embezzling, 
squandering, lavishing, consuming by riot; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 82; -in, 83.  
189 
J 
 
er yummal, v. hath, &c., wasted, lavished 
or squandered; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; 
-ys, 94. J  
jummalit, 85. wasted, squandered, 
lavished.  
ro yummallit, a. too wasted, destroyed, 
&c. J 
neu-yummalit, a. unwasted, unlavished. 
jummalagh or jummaltagh, s. a waster, a 
squanderer, &c.; pl. 71 [change -agh to 
-ee].  
jummallagh, a. wasteful, lavish, 
destructive; prodigal.  
s’jummalagh or s’jummaltagh, a. how 
wasteful or lavishing. J 
s’jummalee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. J 
ro yummallagh or yummaltagh, a. too 
wasteful or lavish, &c.; J  
jummal, or jummallys 
e yummal or yummallys, s. his 
wastefulness, his lavishing or squandering. 
J 
junt, s. 
drogh yunt, s. a bad scam or joint in wood, 
stone, &c. J 
junt, v. 
yunt, v. did joint or jointed; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys. J  
dy yuntal or yuntey, v. to joint together in 
joints, to join in seams. J  
juntit, 85. jointed, having joints. 
ro yuntit, 85, too jointed. J  
junteyder, s. m. a jointer.  
e yunteyder, s. his jointer. J 
juntagh, a. having joints or seams.  
jurnaa or jurnah, s. m. a journey; pl. -ghyn.  
e yurnaa or yurnah, s. his journey; pl. 
-ghyn or -yn. J 
jurnaaghey, v. journeying.  
dy yurnaghey, v. to journey. J 
jurnahys 
e yurnahys, s. his journeying. J 
jus-nish, adv. just now.  
juys, s. m. fir timber, fir, Ez. xxxi. 8: Cha row 
ny cedaryn ayns garey Yee ny syrjey na eshyn: 
cha row ny biljyn-juys dy ve soylit rish eer e 
vanganyn, as cha row yn billey-chesnut casley 
rish e vanglaneyn, cha row billey erbee ayns 
garey Yee casley rishyn son aalid. The cedars 
in the garden of God could not hide him: the fir 
trees were not like his boughs, and the 
chestnut trees were not like his branches; nor 
any tree in the garden of God was like unto him 
in his beauty.  
dy yuys, s. of fir. J 
jym[m]oose, s. f. wrath, ire, anger, 
indignation; pl. -yn.  
e yymmoose, s. his wrath, anger, fury, rage, 
pl. -yn. J 
jymmoosey, v. 
dy yymmoosey, v. to make wroth or angry. 
J 
jymmoosagh, a. wrath, indignant, inflamed 
with anger, furious, raging.  
s’jymmoosagh, a. how wroth. J 
s’jymmoosee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. J 
ro yymmoosagh, a. too wroth or wrathful, 
angry. J 
jymmoosagh, s. m. a wrathful, &c. person; 
pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
neu-yymmoossagh, a. not wrathful. 
jyst 
clooid-juist, s. m. a dish clout. 
juistey, a. d of a wooden dish or dishes.  
yuistey, a. d. of a wooden dish. J  
190 
K 
 
K 
This letter, like f, has no word from other 
letters. For its sound, see Remark 17; and its 
changes see 51.  
kaart, s. m. a card; pl. -yn.  
kaart, s. m. a quart; the weight of 7lbs. of 
wool; pl. -yn.  
e chaart his quart. K 
nyn gaart, s. your, &c. quart. K 
kaart, v. card; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in.  
chaart, v. did card. K 
kaartey 
e chaartey, v. his carding. K 
kaartee, a. d. of carding, or to card. 
kaartit, 85. carded.  
kaarteyder, s. m. a carder; pl. -yn.  
kahngyr, s. f. a cancer; pl. -yn.  
kail, s. f. cole, cabbage, colewort.  
yn chail, s. the cole or cabbage. C.  
nyn gail, s. your, &c. cole or cabbage. K 
bwilleen-kail, s. f. a cabbage; pl. -yn.  
far-chail, s. f. weed or weeds. 
kairdee, s. f. a smithy, a forge; pl. -yn.  
nyn gairdee, s. your, &c. smithy; pl. -yn. K 
kairdagh, a. d. of a smithy or smithery.  
kairdeeys, s. f. smithery or smith craft.  
kalk, v. calk, stop, the leak of a ship or boat; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83.  
kalkey, v. calking, stopping leaks.  
kalkit, 85. calked.  
kalkeyder, s. m. a calker; pl. -yn.  
kalkin, s. m. a calking iron; pl. -yn,  
Kargys, s. f. Lent, forty days before Easter set 
apart by the Church for fasting. Is the word 
from kiar (provide), and gys (to) ?-to 
provide for that festival; or is it from kiare 
(four), and jeih (ten) ? —the number of 
days it contains.  
yn Chargys, s. the Lent. K 
karr or karree, v. mend, repair; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -in, 84. Kerree [‘punish’] is in 
Isaiah, lxi. 4, for repair, when it ought to 
have been karree: As troggee ad ny shenn 
tholtanyn, kerree ad traartys ny shenn 
earishyn, as coamree ad reesht ny ard-valjyn 
treigit, traartys ymmodee sheelogheyn. And 
they shall build the old wastes, they shall raise 
up the former desolations, and they shall repair 
the waste cities, the desolations of many 
generations.  
my charrys, v. if shall, &c. repair. K 
charree, v. did mend or repair. K 
karragh or karraghey, v. mending, 
repairing.  
er charragh or charraghey, v. hath, &c. 
repaired and mended. K 
karrit, 85. repaired, mended. [Kerrit] is in 
Josh. ix. 4, for mended or repaired where it 
ought to have been karrit: Hie ad gys obbyr 
dy cooishagh, as lhig ad orroo hene dy ve 
chaghteryn reeoil, as ghow ad shenn saick er 
nyn assylyn, as siyn-feeyney, shenn, raipit, as 
kerrit. They did work wilily, and went and made 
as if they had been ambassadors, and took old 
sacks upon their asses, and wine bottles, old, 
and rent, and bound up.  
s’karrit, a. how mended or repaired. K 
feer charrit, pt. 6. very much repaired or 
mended. K 
karreyder, s. m. a mender, &c. pl. -yn.  
kart, s. f. a cart; pl. -yn. 
kart, v. muck, rake; -agh, 77; -in, 83; -ins, 
84.  
yn chart, s. the cart. K 
kartey, v. carting; raking muck or mire.  
kartit 
s’kartit, a. how carted or raked with a coal-
rake. K 
karteyde[r], s. m. a gatherer of muck or 
mire.  
kay, s. f. mist, fog.  
yn chay, s. the mist or fog.  
nyn gay, s. your, &c. mist. K 
kayeeagh 
s’keayeeagh, a. how misty, comp. and sup. 
K 
feer chayeeagh, a. very misty, &c. This 
word is used by aged Manks people when 
they wish for particular weather at the 
approach of the different seasons of the 
year; as, arragh chayeeagh; sourey 
ouyragh; fouyr ghrianagh; as geurey 
rioeeagh: [a misty spring, a gloomy 
summer, a sunny autumn and a frosty 
winter]. K 
191 
K 
 
kayid, s. m. mistiness, fogginess.  
yn chayid, s. the mistiness. K 
kayt, s. m. a cat; pl. kiyt.  
yn chayt, s. the cat. K 
nyn gayt, s. your, &c. cat. K 
keiyt, s. pl. cats; the pl. of kayt.  
e cheiyt, s. pl. his cats. K 
nyn geiyt, s. your, &c. cats. K 
crow-cheyt, s. f. the herb bird’s foot.  
kaytlag, s. f. a cat fish; pl. -yn.  
yn chaytlag, s. the cat fish. K 
kease, s. f. buttock, ham.  
yn cheays, s. the ham or buttock. K 
nyn gease, s. your, &c. buttock. The pl. is 
in 2 Sam. x. 4: Shen-y-fa ghow Hanun 
sharvaantyn Ghavid, as ren eh baarey yn 
derrey lieh jeh ny faasaagyn oc, as yiare eh jeu 
nyn goamraghyn ’sy vean, kiart rish nyn 
geasyn, as lhig eh’n raad daue. Wherefore 
Hanun took David’s servants, and shaved off 
the one half of their beards, and cut off their 
garments in the middle, even to their buttocks, 
and sent them away. K 
keayn, s. m. ocean, sea.  
yn cheayn, s. the ocean, the sea. K 
nyn geayn, s. your, &c. ocean or sea. K 
keayin, a. d. of the sea or ocean.  
blest keayin, s. m. a sea blast.  
ynsagh-keayin, s. f. navigation. 
keayn, v. cry, weep; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84.  
cheayn, v. did cry, or cried; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys. K 
cha geayn, v. not cry; -agh; -ee; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms, 94. K 
keayney, v. crying, weeping.  
nyn geayney, s. your, &c. crying, &c. K 
er cheayney, v. hath, &c. cried, K 
keayneyder, s. m. a crier, one that cries; pl. 
-yn.  
keaynit as, 85. cried out.  
keayrt, adv. once, one time; pl. -yn.  
un cheayrt, adv. once, one time. K 
keayrt elley, adv. one time more.  
keayrt dy row, adv. once on a time.  
keayrt ny ghaa, adv. many a time.  
keck, s. m. the excrements or dung of any 
animal; pl. -yn.  
keck, v. dung; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 88  
check, v. 6. did dung, dunged; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. K 
cha geck, v. not dung, or go to stool; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. K 
keckagh, a. excrementitious.  
keckeyder, s. m. a voider of dung; pl. -yn  
kecksee, s. m. one that is besmeared with 
excrements, a dirty fellow.  
keddin 
cheddin, a. same; wheesh cheddin (so 
much); choud cheddin (so far); aght 
cheddin (likewise).  
myrgeddin, adv. also, likewise, in like 
manner. 
keead 
un cheead, s. 6. one hundred.  
nyn geead, s. your, &c. hundred; pl. -yn. K 
yn cheeadoo, a. the hundredth. K 
nyn geadoo, a. our, &c. hundredth, K 
keeagh, s. f. breast or pap, the breast that 
gives milk; pl. -yn.  
yn cheeagh, s. the breast or pap. K 
nyn geeagh, s. your, &c. breast. K 
kee, a. d. of breast milk.  
ben chee, s. a woman that gives suck. K 
ben-chee, s. f. a woman that gives suck.  
boandyr kee, a wet nurse. 
keeaght, s. m. a plough; pl. -yn.  
yn cheeaght, s. the plough. K 
nyn geeaght, s. their, &c. plough. K 
kione keeaght, s. a plough head. 
keeak, s. m. a cake; pl. -yn.  
yn cheeak, s. the cake. K 
nyn geeak, s. your, &c. cake. K 
keeayl<e> or keeaill, s. f. sense, wit; pl. -yn.  
yn cheeayl, s. the sense. Prov. “Keeayl 
chionnit yn cheeayl share, mannagh vel ee 
kionnit ro gheyr.” [Bought wit is the best 
wit, if it be not bought too dear.] K 
nyn geeayl, s. their, &c. sense or wit. K 
keilley, a. d. of sense or wit.  
nyn geiley, a. d. of your, &c. sense or wit. 
Ec kione nyn geiley (at their wits end). K 
Prov. “Kione mooar er y veggan cheilley, 
as kione beg gyn veg edyr. Towse cheilley 
rish.” [A big head on the little (of wits), 
and a little head with none at all. Measure 
192 
K 
 
sense with it.] 
merre-cheilley, s. f. deadness of wit or 
sense.  
e cheilley, s. [of] his wits. K 
keeayll-vairey, s. f. mother’s wit.  
bun[-ch]eeayl, s. m. a moral; pl. -yn.  
meecheeayl, s. f. silliness, simplicity, 
nonsense.  
keeayllagh, n. sensible, witty.  
s’keeayllagh, a. how sensible or witty. K 
s’keeayllee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58.  
feer cheeayllagh, a. very sensible or witty. 
K 
neu-cheeayllagh, a. unwary unwittingly.  
raa-keeayllagh, s. m. a maxim, an adage. 
keeil, s. f. jaw, jamb, side or cheek.  
yn cheeil, s. the jaw, the jamb or side of a 
place; as, keeil dorrysh (the cheek or jamb 
of the door). K 
nyn geeil, s. your, &c. jaw; pl. -yn. K 
keeilley, a. d. of the jaw or cheek; caigney-
keeilley (chewing the cud). Though in 
common conversation we say caigney 
keerey.  
che[e]illey, a. d. of the jaw. K 
keeil çhiollee, s. hearth side, or fire side.  
keeil doarlish, s. side of the gap.  
keeil dorrysh, s. side of the door or door 
side.  
keeill or keeihll, s. f. church, kirk.  
yn cheeill, s. the church. K 
nyn geeill or geeihll, s. your, &c. church. K 
kialteenyn, s. pl. churches.  
e chialteenyn, s. his churches. K 
nyn gialteenyn, s. your, &c. churches. K  
killagh, a. d. of a church; Prov. Cha boght 
as lugh killagh [As poor as a church 
mouse]; and, Clagh ny killagh ayns kione 
dty hie wooar. [A stone of the church be in 
thy big house, i.e., the kitchen.] This was 
once thought the greatest curse.  
recortys-killagh, s. f. church register.  
cheeillagh, a. d. of the church. K 
killey, a. d. near the church, but not 
belonging to.  
cheilley, a. d. of the church. K 
keilleig, s. f. an enclosure<s> belonging to 
a church or chapel; pl. -yn.  
keeir 
yn cheeir, s. the cud. K 
keeir, a. a dark colour, the natural colour of 
what is called in English a black sheep.  
s’keeir, a. how dark coloured, sable. K 
s’keeirey, a. id., comp. and sup. K 
feer cheeir, a. very misty or dark; <as,> 
[keeir, v.] 
cheeir yn oie orrin (the night darkened on 
us). K 
keeirit, 85. ma[d]e dark or black; vel yn oie 
keeirit ? (is it nightfall, or is the night as 
dark as it will be)? 
keeir as gorrym, s. m. blue and the colour 
keeir mixed in wool being spun and wove 
into cloth is so called.  
keeir-lheeah, s. m. those two colours of 
wool spun and wove into cloth are so 
called, and which was formerly the garb 
generally worn by the Manks peasantry.  
yn cheeir-lheeah, s. the russet, or dark gray 
woollen cloth. K 
keeiragh or kayragh, s. the darkness of the 
night, or night fall. Is this word from kay 
(mist)?  
yn cheeiragh, s. the night fall. K 
keek, s. m. a peep; pl. -yn. 
keek, v. peep; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83.  
keekeyder, s. m. a peeper; pl. -yn.  
keep, s. m. a sort of strong grass of the bent 
kind.  
keesh. s. f. tax, fee, tribute; pl. -yn.  
yn cheesh, s. 6. the tax or due. K 
nyn geesh, s. your, &c. tax or tribute. K 
thie keesh, s. m. a custom house.  
keeshagh, a. tributary.  
kegeesh, s. [f.] fortnight; pl. -yn. Prov. 
“Three kegeeshyn dy chegeeshyn slane,  
Ta voish laa’l Thomys sy Nollick gys laa’l 
Breeshey Bane.” [Three fortnights of 
fortnights whole; these are from St. 
Thomas’ Day in Christmas to White St. 
Bridget’s Day.] 
yn chegeesh, s. 6. the fortnight. K 
nyn gegeeish, s. your, &c. fortnight. K 
keil or keill*, v. conceal, bide, secrete; -agh; 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83.  
cha geill* or geil, v. not conceal or hide; 
193 
K 
 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms. K 
cheil or cheill*, v. 6. did conceal or hide; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms ,-ys, 94. K 
keiltyn, v. concealing, secreting, &c.  
er cheilltyn, v. hath, &c. concealed. K 
nyn geiltyn, v. your, &c. concealing, &c. K 
keillit 
s’keillit, a. how concealed or hid. K 
ro cheillit, pt. too concealed or hid. K 
keilleyder, s. m. a concealer, a hider, 
purloiner.  
keilleig, s. a fish called kellack or kellag; pl. 
-yn.  
yn cheilleig, s. the kellag. K 
keim, s. f. amble an ambling pace; Prov. “My 
ta keim sy laair, bee keim sy [l]hiy.” [If 
there is an amble in the mare, there will be 
an amble in the colt.] 
keimagh, a. able to amble.  
keimeragh, ambling, pacing.  
keint, s. m. kind, sort, species, somewhat like.  
yn cheint, s. 6. the sort, the kind. K 
nyn geint, s. your, &c. kind, sort. K 
keird, s. f. trade, employment, occupation, 
business; pl. -yn.  
yn cheird, s. the trade. K 
nyn geird, s. your, &c. trade. K 
keirdey, a. d. of a trade, or business.  
cheirdey, a. d. of a trade or trades. K 
keirdagh, s. m. a tradesman, a craftsman.  
keirn, s. m. the round tree, the mountain ash, 
a berry of its fruit; a kind of bird.  
yn cheirn, s. the mountain ash. K 
keish, a. obese, fat; s. f. a fat pig.  
yn cheish, s. the obese, the fat. K 
keishid, s. m. obeseness, fatness.  
keiyn, a. kind, delicate, &c.; Prov. xxix. 21: 
Eshyn ta dy keiyn troggal e harvaant veih e 
aegid, gowee eh er dy ve e vac ec y jerrey. He 
that delicately bringeth up his servant from a 
child shall have him become his son at the 
length.  
feer cheiyn, a. very kind, or kindly. K 
dy keiyn, adv. kindly, delicately; [L]am. iv. 
5: Adsyn va beaghey dy keiyn, t’ad treigit ayns 
ny straïdyn: adsyn va coamrit lesh scarleod t’ad 
lhie er ny torranyn. They that did feed delicately 
are desolate in the streets: they that were 
brought up in scarlet embrace dunghills.  
keayn, adv. kindly or kind. 
kelk, s. m. chalk; pl. -yn. 
yn chelk, s. 6. the chalk. K 
nyn gelk, s. your, &c. chalk. K 
kelk, v. chalk; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 88.  
kelkal or kelkey, v. chalking.  
kelkit, 85. chalked, scored with chalk.  
kelkeyder, s. m. a chalker; pl. -yn.  
kellagh, s. m. a cock; a wooden anchor with a 
stone in it. [pl. 71: change -agh to -ee]. The 
male[s] of many fowls are called kellagh; 
as kellagh guiy (a gander); kellagh tunnag 
(a drake)  
yn chellagh, s. the cock. K 
nyn gellagh, s. your, &c. cock; pl. 71. K 
kellee, a. d. of a cock or cock.  
chellee, a. d. 6. of the cock or cocks. K 
kemmyrk, s. f. refuge, protection.  
yn chemmyrk, s. 6. the refuge. K 
nyn gemmyrk, s. your, &c. refuge. K 
kemmyrkagh, s. m. a refugee, one who 
stands in need of refuge or protection; pl. 
71 [change -agh to -ee].  
yn chemmyrkagh, the refugee; pl. 71. K 
kenjal, a. kind, benevolent, mellow.  
s’kenjal, a. how kindly, mellow. K 
s’kenjaley, a. id., comp. and sup. K 
feer chenjal, a. 6. very kindly, or mellow. 
K 
neu-chenjal, a. unkind, not kindly.  
kenjallys, s. m. kindness, benevolence, 
kindliness.  
e chenjallys, s. his kindness, gentleness, 
benevolence. K 
nyn genjallys, s. your, &c. kindness. K 
kenjallys-graihagh, s. m. loving kindness.  
e chenjallys-graihagh, s. his loving-
kindness. K 
kennip, s. f. hemp; pl. -yn.  
yn chenip, s. 6. the hemp. K 
nyn genip, s. your, &c. hemp. K 
kennipey, a. d. hempen, of hemp.  
genipey, a. pl. hemp [??]; a. d. of hemp. K 
keoie, a. wild, mad, in a rage, not tame.  
s’keoie, a. how wild or mad. K 
s’keoiey, a. id., comp. and sup. K 
feer cheoie, a. 6. very wild, mad, or in a 
194 
K 
 
rage.  
eaghcheoy, s. f. sciatic, rheumatism. [‘mad 
horse’] 
keoieid or keoieys, s. m. wildness, &c.  
e cheoieid, s. his wildness, &c. K 
nyn geoï-id, s. your, &c. wildness, &c. K 
keagh 
er keagh, a. (from keoï), wild, raging.  
goaill cheagh, v. getting mad or in a rage. 
K 
keoyeeagh, a. fulsome, musty.  
feer cheoyagh, a. very fulsome, or musty. 
K 
kerçheen, s. f. m. a cullion, a cringe, an 
underling, a very dependent being.  
yn cherçheen, s. the underling or cullion. K 
feer cherçheenagh, a. in a very cullionly 
manner. K 
kerçheenys, s. f. the act of doing the 
meanest actions for hire, mean dependancy, 
slavishness, base, meanness.  
e cherçhe[e]nys, s. his cullionness. K 
kere or khere, s. f. a comb, wax; pl. -yn, or 
-nyn; <Psalm, xix. 10> [see kere-volley 
below]. 
yn chere, s. the comb.  
nyn gere, s. your, &c. comb. K 
kere-[v]ol<v>ley, s. f. honey comb, or 
rather a sweet comb; as the volley here 
comes from millish; [Psalm, xix. 10: Ny 
smoo t’ad dy v’er nyn yeearree na airh, dy 
jarroo, na mooarane airh ghlen: ny s’miljey 
neesht na mill, as y khere-volley. More to be 
desired are they than gold, yea, than much fine 
gold: sweeter also than honey, and the honey-
comb.] 
kere, v. comb.  
cha gere, v. not comb; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms. K 
chere, v. did comb; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys. K 
kerey, v. combing, teasing, hackling.  
dy cherey, v. to comb, to tease, or hackle. 
K 
kereit or keret, 85. combed, teased, &c.  
s’keret, a. how well teased or combed. K 
kereyder, s. m. a comber, teaser, &c.  
yn cher<er>eyder, s. the comber, the 
teaser. K 
kerr or kerree, v. punish; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86. Kerree is in 
Isaiah, lxi. 4, for repair, when it ought to 
have been karree.  
cha gerree or gerr*, v. not punish; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms. K 
cherr or cherree, v. did punish; -agh; -in; 
-it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. K 
kerrit, 85. punished. This word is in Josh. 
ix. 4, for mended or repaired where it ought 
to have been karrit [q.v.].  
s’kerrit, a. how punished. K 
kerraghey, v. punishing, taking vengeance.  
kerraghey, s. m. punishment, vengeance; 
pl. 69 [change -ey to -yn]. 
e cherraghey, s. his punishment. K 
nyn gerragh or gerraghey, s. your, &c. 
punishment. kerrin, s. m. a square of 
anything, a pane.  
kerriny[n], s. pl. the pl. of kerroo and 
kerrin.  
kern[-]riaghyl, s. m. a square; pl. 76 [i.e. 
kern-riaghil].  
kesh, s. f. froth, foam; pl. -yn. 
yn chesh, s. the froth or foam. K 
kesh, v. froth, foam; -agh, 77. -ee, 80; -in, 
83.  
cha gesh, v. not froth or foam; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms, 94. K 
chesh, v. did froth or foam; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. K 
keshal, v. frothing, foaming, &c.  
er cheshal, v. hath, &c. frothed, or foamed. 
K 
kesheyder, s. m. a frother, &c.; pl. -yn.  
keshagh 
s’keshagh, a. how frothy or foamy. K 
s’keshee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. K 
keshag, s. f. a bunch of froth or foam that 
fly together. This word is applied to snow 
when it comes down like feathers.  
yn cheshag, s. the bunch of froth, &c. K 
keshagagh, a. in bunches, having bunches.  
kesmad, s. m. a step, a pace; pl. -yn. [cf. 
tesmad] 
yn chesmad, s. 6. the step; pl. -yn. K 
nyn gesmad, s. your, &c. step; pl. -yn. K 
kesmad-coshey, a foot step.  
195 
K 
 
kessey 
yn chessey, s. the cast off piece of land. K 
nyn gessey, s. your, &c. c[a]st of[f] piece of 
land. K 
kest, s. m. a turn or cast, a length spun by a 
roper at a time; pl. -yn. 
yn chest, s. the turn, or length spun by a 
roper at once.  
kest, v. cast or struggle; -agh, 77; -ee, 80.  
kestal, v. struggling in wrestling.  
kestit, 85. cast, turned off.  
kesteyder, s. m. one who gives a cast, turns 
or struggle; pl. -yn.  
kewyl, s. a keel; pl. -yn.  
yn chewyl, s. 6. the keel. K 
mackewyl, s. m. a kelson or keelson. 
key, s. m. a quay; pl. -ghyn.  
keyee, a. d. of a quay or keys.  
key, s. m. cream; pl. -ghyn.  
yn chey, s. the cream. K 
nyn gey, s. your, &c. cream. K 
keyjeen, s. a cock’s comb, a hen’s comb; pl. 
-yn.  
keyjeenagh, a. having a comb as a cock.  
keyl, a. fine, small, slender. 
s’keyl, a. how fine or slender. K 
s’keylley, a. id., comp. and sup.  
feer cheyl, a. very fine or slender. K 
keyley, a. pl. fine, small, slender.  
keyl, v. to make fine, small, or slender; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
keylagh, v. growing or getting fine, small, 
or slender.  
keylit, 85. made fine or slender.  
keylid, s. m. fineness, &c.  
keylid-mean, s. the waist.  
keyll, s. f. a wood, a forest.  
yn cheyll, s. the wood or forest. K 
keylljyn, s. pl. forests, woods.  
keylley, a. d. of the wood or forest.  
cheylley, a. d. of the wood or forest. K 
cassan-ayns-keyll, s. m. a grove.  
keyllagh or keyhlagh, s. f. a dryad, a wood 
nymph; a fabulous deformed old woman; 
as, keyllagh-ny-grummag, and y cheyllagh 
ghaney myr t’ou. [Ugly hag as thou art.]  
yn cheyllagh, s. the Dryad or wood-nymph. 
K  
keyllys, s. f. a strait, a firth, a narrow neck of 
sea, a sound; pl. -yn.  
sy cheyllys, s. in the sound or strait. K 
keym, s. a stile, or steps to go over a fence.  
yn cheym, s. the style or step. K 
keymyn, s. pl. steps on which to step over a 
river; the pl. of keym.  
keym-Chreest, s. f. the herb centuary.  
keynnagh, s. f. moss; pl. 72 [change -agh to 
-eeyn].  
keynnee, a. d. of moss.  
keyrrey, s. f. a sheep; pl. kirree.  
yn cheyrrey, s. the single sheep. K 
kirree, s. pl. sheep; the pl. of keyrrey.  
e chirree, s. 6. pl. his sheep. K 
kirree vooarey, a. pl. big sheep. M 
keyrragh, a. d. of sheep.  
cheyrragh, a. d. 6. of sheep. K 
meeyl cheyrragh, s. f. a sheep-louse. 
ny geyrragh, a. d. of sheep; John, x. 1: 
Eshyn nagh vel goll stiagh er y dorrys ayns 
bwoaillee ny geyrragh, agh ta drappal seose 
er aght ennagh elley, t’eh shen ny vaarliagh as 
ny roosteyr. He that entereth not by the door 
into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other 
way, the same is a thief and a robber. K 
khennough, v. carping, cavilling.  
Kherree, s. f. Kitty.  
khyrloghe, a. unsound, carious.  
s’khyrloghe, a. how unsound in body. K 
s’khyrloghey, a. id, comp. and sup. K 
khyrloghey, a. pl. unsound, &c.  
khyrloghid, s. m. unsoundness, gourdiness.  
kiadd, v. form; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
chiad or chiadd*, v. 6. did form; -agh; -ee; 
-ey; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys; Job, xxxiii. 
6: Cur-my-ner, ta mish cordail rish dty yeearree 
ayns lieh Yee; ta mish myrgeddin er my 
chiaddey ass yn ooir. Behold, I am according 
to thy wish in God’s stead: I also am formed out 
of the clay. There is no doubt but this word 
is from chied (first). K 
kiaddey, v. forming, modelling; [Isa. xlv. 
7. Ta mee kiaddey yn soilshey, as croo yn 
196 
K 
 
dorraghys; ta mee jannoo shee as reill yn olk. 
Mish yn Chiarn ta bun ooilley ny reddyn shoh. I 
form the light, and create darkness: I make 
peace, and create evil: I the Lord do all these 
things.] 
kiaddit, 85. formed; <Isa. xlv. 7> [See 
above, kiaddey].  
kialg, s. f. guile, deceit, craft, subtlety, wile, 
cunning; pl. -yn.  
yn chialg, s. 6. the guile or deceit. K 
kialgagh, a. hypocritical, crafty, deceitful, 
wily, sly.  
s’kialgagh, a. how hypocritical, crafty, 
deceitful, or subtile. K 
s’kialgee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. K 
feer chialgagh, a. very hypocritical or 
deceitful. K 
kialgeyr, s. m. a hypocrite, a deceiver, a 
subtle deceitful person; pl. -yn.  
yn chialgeyr, s. the hypocrite or deceiver. 
K 
kialgeyrys (sic: stress) or kialgys, s. m. 
subtleness, craftiness, deceitfulness.  
e chialgeyrys or chialgys, s. his hypocrisy 
or subtlety. K 
nyn gialgeyrys (sic: stress), s. your, &c. 
subtleness, craftiness. 
kialter, s. m. woollen cloth before it is milled 
or tucked.  
yn chialter, s. 6. the unmilled woollen 
cloth. K  
kialteragh, a. d. of woollen cloth unmilled.  
eggey chialteragh, s. a web of unmilled 
woollen cloth. K 
kiangl* or ki[a]ngle, v. tie, bind, make fast, 
or secure; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. Prov. 
“Kiangle myr noid, as yiow myr carrey.” 
[Bind as an enemy, and you will have as a 
friend.] 
cha giangl* or giangle, v. not tie or bind; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. K 
chiangl* or chiangle, v. 6. did bind or tie; 
-agh; -ey; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94; 
Mat. xvi. 19: As ver-yms dhyt’s ogheryn 
reeriaght niau: as cre-erbee chianglys oo er y 
thalloo, bee eh kianlt ayns niau: as cre-erbee 
eayslys oo er y thalloo, bee eh er ny eaysley 
ayns niau. And I will give unto thee the keys of 
the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou 
shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: 
and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall 
be loosed in heaven. K 
kiangley, v. binding, tying, astringent.  
kianglee, a. d. of binding or tying.  
dy chiangley, v. to bind, tie, or make 
costive. K 
er giangley, v. hath, &c. tied or bound. K 
kianglt or kianlt, 85. tied, bound, made 
fast, secure; costive.  
s’kianlt, a. how tied or bound. K 
ro chianglt, pl. too bound, or too costive. K 
feer chianlt, pt. very bound or tied. K 
kianglt booise, bound in thanks or bound 
to thanks.  
kiangley, s. m. a tie, a bandage; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn]. 
kiangleyder, s. m. a tyer or binder; pl. -yn.  
yn chiangleyder, s. the binder or tyer. K 
kiannoort, s. m. a governor; pl. -yn.  
yn chiannoort, s. the governor. K 
nyn giannoort, s. our, &c. governor. K 
kiannoortagh, a. d. of a governor.  
kiannoortys, s. m. government; pl. -syn.  
kiap, s. m. a block; <Isa. lvii. 14>, <[Lev.] 
xix. 14> [See below, kiap-snapperal]; a 
last; pl. -yn.  
yn chiap, s. the block or last. K 
kip or kipp, s. pl. blocks or logs; the pl. of 
kiap. 
e chip, s. 6. his blocks or lasts. K 
feer chiapit, a. very blockaded or confined. 
K 
kiap-snapperal 
[Lev.] xix. 14: Cha jean oo gweeaghyn da'n 
bouyr, ny kiap-snapperal y choyrt roish y doal; 
agh gowee oo aggle roish Jee: Mish y Chiarn. 
Thou shalt not curse the deaf, nor put a 
stumblingblock before the blind, but shalt fear 
thy God: I am the Lord 
yn chiap (sic)-snapperal, s. the stumbling 
block; Isa. lvii. 14: Tilg-jee seose, tilg-jee 
seose, kiartee-jee yn raad, scugh-jee yn kiap-
snapperal ass raad my phobble. Cast ye up, 
cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the 
stumblingblock out of the way of my people. K 
kiar or kiare, a. left.  
laue chiare, s. left hand. K 
197 
K 
 
kiar* or kiare, v. provide, resolve; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
kiare-jee, p. provide ye.  
kiare-jee diu-hene, provide ye for 
yourselves.  
cha giare, v. not provide or resolve. K  
chiar* or chiare, v. did resolve, intend, did 
purpose, or provide; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. K 
kiarail, v. care, cares, careth, &c.; 
determine, &c.  
er chiarail, v. hath, &c. intended, purposed, 
provided, or resolved. K 
kiarit, 85. provided; resolved, determined, 
designed, settled to be.  
s’kiarit, a. how designed or resolved. K 
slane kiarit, adv. wholly resolved.  
kiareyder, s. m. a provider; one that 
resolves.  
kiarail, s. f. care, purpose, design, 
carefulness; pl. -yn. 
carail, s. f. care; pl. -yn.  
kiaralagh, a. careful, circumspect, 
industrious; s. m. a careful person; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
e chiarailagh, s. his careful one; pl. 71. K 
carailagh, a. careful.  
s’kiaralagh, a. how careful. K 
s’kiaralee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. K 
s’cairailagh, a. how careful. C 
s’cairailee, a. more and most careful. C 
ro chiarailagh, a. too careful. K 
neu-chiarailagh, a. uncareful, careless. 
carailys, s. f. carefulness.  
ard-chiarail or ard-chiarailys, s. f. the 
providence of God, foresight displayed in 
taking measures before hand; pl. -yn; -syn.  
meechiarail 
e veechiarail, s. his carelessness. M 
kiare, a. four. This word cannot be better 
pronounced than kr, or care, English.  
nyn giare, s. your, &c. four. K 
kiare-jeig, a. fourteen.  
yn chiarjeig, s. the fourteen. K 
kiare as feed, a. four and twenty.  
yn chiare-as-feed, s. the Twenty-four 
Keys, the Manks House of Commons. K 
kiare as daeed, a. four and forty.  
kiare feed, a. fourscore.  
yn chiarfeed, s. the eighty, or four score. K 
kiare-feed as nuy persoonyn jeig, a. s. 
ninety-nine persons; Luke, xv. 7: Ta mee gra 
riu, dy bee boggey myrgeddin ayns niau, jeh un 
pheccagh ta goaill arrys, ny smoo na jeh kiare-
feed as nuy persoonyn jeig cairagh, nagh vel 
feme arrys. I say unto you, that likewise joy 
shall be in heaven over one sinner that 
repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just 
persons, which need no repentance.  
kiare chassagh, a. four-footed, quadruped.  
kiare-filley, adv. four-fold.  
kiarroo, a. fourth, the ordinal of four.  
yn chiarroo, s. 6. the fourth; Dan. vii. 23: 
Bee yn chiarroo veisht yn chiarroo reeriaght 
er y thalloo, agh bee casley rish reeriaght erbee 
elley as stroie-ys eh yn slane seihll, as nee eh 
stampey sheese eh, as brishey eh ayns 
peeshyn. The fourth beast shall be the fourth 
kingdom upon earth, which shall be diverse 
from all kingdoms, and shall devour the whole 
earth, and shall tread it down, and break it in 
piece. K 
nyn giarroo, a. your, &c. fourth. K 
kerroo, s. m. a quarter, the fourth part.  
kerriny[n], s. pl. the pl. of kerroo and 
kerrin.  
kiark, s. f. a hen, the female of fowl; pl. -yn.  
yn chiark, s. the hen; pl. -yn. K 
nyn giark, s. your, &c. hen; pl. -yn. K 
kirk, a. d. of a hen or hens.  
kirkey, a. pl. [??] hen or hens.  
kiark my-leydee, s. f. a goldfinch.  
kiark rhennee, s. f. a partridge.  
kiark ushtey, s. f. a coot.  
breck-kiark, s. f. chicken pox.  
connagh-ny-g<h>iark, s. f. the herb 
henbane.  
cront-kione-kiark, s. m. a knot made by 
putting the two ends together as if one, and 
turning a knot on.  
shirragh-ny-giark, s. m. the falcon, a 
hawk.  
thie kiark, s. m. a hen house. 
kiarkyl, s. m. a hoop; a circle; pl. 76 
[kiarkil].  
carkyl, s. m. a hoop, a circle; pl. 76 
[carkil]. 
198 
K 
 
yn charkyl, s. the hoop, &c. C 
nyn garkyl, s. your, &c. hoop; pl. -yn, or 
76. K 
far-charkyl, s. m. a truss hoop.  
lieh-charkyl, s. m. a semicircle.  
carkylagh, a. <a> circular.  
s’karkylagh, a. how circular. K  
s’karkylee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. K 
kiart, a. even, right, just, exact, flat, accurate.  
cairt, a. correct, exact, just, even, flat. 
s’kiart, a. how even, exact, just, level, flat. 
K 
s’cairt, a. how even, exact, accurate, just, 
level, flat. C  
s’kiartey, a. id., comp. and sup. K 
s’cairtey, a. more and most even, exact, 
&c. C 
feer chiart, a. very correct, exact, even, &c. 
feer chairt, a. very exact, just, even, flat. C  
cairtey, a. pl. just, right, even, exact.  
anchiart, a. uneven, unequal.  
lieh-kiart, s. m. the even half.  
lieh-chiart, a. uneven, odd, rough.  
neu-chiart, a. uneven, not level, dissimilar.  
kiart* or kiartee, v. make even, right, 
accurate, flat, &c.; -agh, 77; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cairt, v. -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha giart, v. not make even, fix or adjust. K 
kiartagh or kiartaghey, v. adjusting, fixing 
in order, preparing, getting ready, 
rectifying.  
dy chiartaghey, v. to adjust or fix in order. 
K 
nyn giartagh, s. your, &c. char or job. K 
cairtaghey 
dy chairtaghey, v. to fix, prepare, make 
even; -in, 83 -ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
kiartit, 85. made right, even, just, or exact, 
fixed, finished.  
cairtit, 85. fixed, finished.  
s’kiartit, a. how fixed, prepared, made 
even. K 
kiartey, s. m. a char, a job.  
kiartaghyn, s. pl. chars, jobs, fixings.  
kiarteyder 
nyn giarteyder, s. your, &c. adjuster, &c. 
K 
kiaull, s. clamour, noise, din; pl. -yn. 
yn chiaull, s. 6. the clamour, noise; music. 
nyn giaull, s. your, &c. clamour, noise, or 
din. K 
kiaullee, a. d. of music or melody.  
chiaullee, a. d. of music or noise. K 
fir-chiaullee, s. pl. musicians; Rev. xviii. 
22: As cha bee kiaull claaseyderyn, as fir-
chiaullee, as piperyn, as fir-chayrnee, arragh 
er ny chlashtyn aynyd’s. And the voice of 
harpers, and musicians, and of pipers, and 
trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in 
thee.  
kiaull-reggyrt, s. f. echo.  
yn chiaull-reggyrt, s. the echo. K 
kiaull, v. make clamour or noise; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
chiaull, v. [did make clamour or noise] 
-agh; -aghey; -ee; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 
94. K 
kiaulley, v. noising, making music.  
kiaullit, 85. made to sound.  
kiaulleyder, s. m. a musician, a maker of 
noise, &c.; pl. -yn.  
yn chiaulleyder, s. the musician. K 
kiaulleeaght, s. m. music with instruments 
or voice; dancing, singing; Luke, xv. 25: 
Nish va’n mac shinney mooie ’sy vagher: as tra 
haink eh er-gerrey da’n thie, cheayll eh 
kiaulleeaght as daunsin. Now his elder son 
was in the field: and as he came and drew nigh 
to the house, he heard musick and dancing; pl. 
-yn.  
yn chiaulleeaght, s. the noise or music. K 
nyn giaulleeaght, s. your music, &c. K 
kiaullane, s. a bell; a clarion; a clamourer; 
pl. -yn.  
yn chiaullane, s. the bell or hand-bell. K 
kiaullane[y]der, s. m. a bellman, a crier; 
pl. -yn; Ecclesiasticus, xx. 15: Son y veggan 
t’eh dy choyrt, t’eh mooaraghey dy creoi, t’eh 
fosley e veeal myr kiaullaneyder: t’eh 
geeasagh jiu, as shirrey reesht mairagh: ta 
lheid y fer dwoaiagh fenish Jee as dooinney. 
He giveth little, and upbraideth much; he 
openeth his mouth like a crier; to day he 
199 
K 
 
lendeth, and to morrow will he ask it again: 
such an one is to be hated of God and man.  
yn chiaullaneyder, s. the bell-man. K 
kibbin, s. m. a stake, spike, or peg driven or 
put into some thing to tie to; pl. -yn.  
yn chibbin, s. 6. the peg, pin, or stake. K 
kickl or kickil, s. f. tickle, titillation. 
kickl or kickil, v. tickle or titillate; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
chickil, v. 6. did tickle; -agh; -ee; -in; -ins; 
-it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. K 
kickley, v. tickling, titillating.  
kicklit, 85. tickled.  
kicklagh, a. ticklesome.  
s’kicklagh, a. how ticklesome. K 
s’kicklee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. K 
kiebbey, s. m. a spade; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
yn chiebbey, s. 6. the spade; pl. 67. K 
kiebbagh, a. d. of a spade or spades.  
kiebbey cleiyee, s. m. a hedge spade.  
kiebbey garey, s. m. a garden spade.  
kied, s. leave, permission, allowance to do, 
&c.; pl. -yn.  
yn chied, s. the leave or permission. K 
nyn gied, s. your, &c. liberty, or 
permission. K 
kimmagh, s. m. a criminal, culprit, felon, 
malefactor; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
kymmagh. See kimmagh.  
yn chimmagh, s. 6. the criminal or culprit. 
K 
kimmeeys, s. m. criminality, felony.  
yn chimmeeys, s. the criminality. K 
Kingeesh, s. f. Pentecost, Whitsuntide. Is this 
word from çhengees (tongues in two), or 
from quinquagist, Latin, (fifty)?— the 
number of days from Easter to this feast.  
yn Chingeesh, s. the Pentecost. K 
nyn Ghingeesh, s. your, &c. Pentecost or 
Whitsuntide. K  
kinjagh, a. constant, still, continual, regular, 
incessant.  
s’kinjagh, a. how constant or regular. K 
s’kinjee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. K 
ro chinjagh, a. 6. too constant. K 
meein-chinjagh, a. moderate.  
neu-chinjagh, a. irregular, inconsistent, 
unsteady.  
kinjid, s. m. constancy, continuance, 
regularity.  
yn chinjid, s. the regularity, the constancy.  
kink, s. m. a wrinkle or double in a rope, 
yarn, or thread with too much twist, pl. -yn.  
kione, s. m. a head, an end; pl. see king. This 
word is also used for pass; as, haink eh gy-
k[io]ne (and it came to pass).  
as-haink eh gy-kione and it came to pass, 
or to an end.  
yn chione, s. 6. the head, the end. K 
nyn gione, s. your, &c. head. K 
king, s. pl. heads, chiefs, ends; the pl. of 
kione.  
nyn ghing, s. your, &c. heads. K [i.e. ging]  
ching, a. d. 6. of the head or heads. gour e 
ching (headlong).  
er-e-chione, adv. p. on his head.  
er-y-chione, adv. on the head, ahead.  
kione ardys 
e chione-ardys, s. his haughtiness; Pro. 
xxv. 27: Cha vel eh follan dy ee rouyr mill; myr 
shen cha vel eh son goo dooinney, dy ve geiyrt 
dy gyere er e chione-ardys hene. It is not good 
to eat much honey: so for men to search their 
own glory is not glory. K 
kione enee, a. present, or in presence.  
kione eiyrt or edeiyrt, s. the head of the 
bed.  
kione emshir, s. a weather head in the air.  
kione fenish, adv. in audience of, present.  
kiongoyrt, pre. before, in presence of.  
kione hallooin, s. a cape or promontory.  
kione keeaght, s. a plough head.  
kione lajeragh, a. headstrong; Hos. iv. 16: 
Son ta Israel creoi-wannallagh, myr colbagh 
kione-lajeragh: nish nee yn Chiarn fassaghey 
ad myr eayin ayns aber aalin. For Israel slideth 
back as a backsliding heifer: now the Lord will 
feed them as a lamb in a large place.  
kione-my-laee, s. the drooping or lower 
end.  
kione roauyr, s. the best part, the thick end 
or head.  
kione tramman, s. m. the fish bull-head.  
kione y cheilley, adv. through others, 
mixed.  
200 
K 
 
ard-chione, s. m. superior.  
cront-kione-kiark, s. m. a knot made by 
putting the two ends together as if one, and 
turning a knot on.  
dooan-y-chione-cast, s. f. the herb self-
heal 
kionnan, [s.] the dim. of kione, a lump less 
than a head, a bundle; Acts, xxviii. 3: As 
heih Paul kionnan dy vrasnagyn, as hug eh ad 
er yn aile, as haink ard-nieu ass y chiass, as 
lhian eh rish e laue. And when Paul had 
gathered a bundle of sticks, and laid them on 
the fire, there came a viper out of the heat, and 
fastened on his hand; pl. -yn.  
yn chionnan, s. 6. the lump less than a 
head. K 
ny-chione, adv. by the hand; Jud. xvi. 26: 
As dooyrt Samson rish y yuilley va ny-chione, 
Lhig dou loaghtey ny pillaryn ta cummal seose 
y thie, dy voddym goaill my aash. And Samson 
said unto the lad that held him by the hand, 
Suffer me that I may feel the pillars whereupon 
the house standeth, that I may lean upon them; 
literally, a-head. of, mingled among; Num. 
xv<i>. 6 and 9: Ny son rea, nee oo kiarail son 
oural-arran, yn wheiggoo ayrn jeh ephah dy 
flooyr mestit lesh yn trass ayrn jeh hin dy ooil 
ny-chione. Or for a ram, thou shalt prepare for 
a meat offering two tenth deals of flour mingled 
with the third part of an hin of oil. 
Eisht ver eh lesh marish y dow, oural-arran jeh 
three omeryn dy flooyr, lesh lieh hin dy ooil ny-
chione. Then shall he bring with a bullock a 
meat offering of three tenth deals of flour 
mingled with half an hin of oil.  
kin-oie, s. (the kin from kione), the end of 
the night.  
kin mairagh, s. the end of to-morrow 
night.  
kin nuyr, s. the end of next night.  
kionn* or kionnee, v. buy, purchase; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87;-ys, 88.  
cha gion or gionn*, v. not buy; -agh; -ee; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94.  
chionn* or chionnee, v. 6. did buy, bought; 
-agh; -aghey; -in; -ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 
94. K 
kionnagh or kionnaghey, v. buying, 
purchasing.  
er gionnaghey, v. hath, &c. bought or 
purchased. K 
kionnee, a. d. of buying or purchasing.  
chionnee, a. d. of buying, &c.; as, Ta 
feeagh y phing chionnee feer lhome. [The 
purchasing value of a penny is very bare.] 
K 
fer-<ch>[k]ionnee, s. m. a redeemer, a 
ransomer.  
aa-chionnagh, v. buying again, 
repurchasing.  
kionnit, 85. bought, purchased.  
s’kionnit, a. how purchased or bought. K 
kionneeaght, s. m. a purchase; pl. -yn.  
yn chionneeaght, s. the purchase. K 
kionneyder, s. m. a buyer or purchaser.  
yn chionneyder, s. 6. the buyer or 
purchaser.  
nyn gionneyder, s. your, &c. purchaser. 
kip or kipp, s. f. a whip; Pro. xxvi. 3: Ta kip 
son y chabbyl, streean son yn assyl, as slat son 
dreeym yn ommydan. A whip for the horse, a 
bridle for the ass, and a rod for the fool’s back; 
pl. -yn.  
yn chipp, s. the whip; pl. -yn. K 
kip or kipp, v. whip; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
kippit 
s’kippit, a. how whipped. K 
kirbyl, s. m. a lunch or luncheon; pl. 76 
[kirbil].  
kirkin, s. m. an unsteady, inconstant person; 
pl. -yn.  
kirkinagh, a. wavering, fluctuating.  
kirkinys, s. m. inconstancy.  
kirt, v. make speed, away; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
kirtagh, v. making haste or speed.  
kishan, s. m. a measure of eight quarts, a 
peck. Prov. “Sheeu kishan dy yoan Mayrnt 
maaill bleeaney Vannin.” [A peck of 
March dust is worth a year’s rent of Man.] 
yn chishan, s. 6. the peck; pl. -yn. K 
nyn gishan, s. your, &c. peck, pl. -yn. K 
kishan shellan, s. [m.] a bee hive.  
kishaney, v. hiving.  
201 
K 
 
kishtey, s. m. a chest; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
yn chishtey, s. the chest; pl. 67. K 
kit, s. a piece of wood made small in both 
ends to play with.  
kiun or kiune, a. calm, tranquil.  
s’kiune, a. how calm or serene. K  
s’kiuney, a. id., comp. and sup. K 
feer chiun or chiune, a. 6. very calm. 
kiun* or kiunee, v. calm, tranquillize; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha giune, v. not calm; -agh; -e; -ins; -ym; 
-yms, 94. K  
chiun* or chiune, v. [did] calm; -agh; 
-aghey; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. K 
chiunee, v. did become calm. K  
kiunagh or kiunaghey, v. calming.  
kiuney, s. f. a calm; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. The gender of this is settled under 
the proverb. See chiuney.  
yn chiuney, s. the calm; Prov. “Yn chiuney 
smoo erbee geay jiass sniessey j’ee.” [The 
greatest calm of all, the South wind nearest 
to it; i.e. the greater the calm the nearer the 
South wind.] 
nyn giuney, s. your, &c. calm; pl. 67. K 
kiunit, 85. calmed or becalmed.  
s’kiunit, a. how calmed. K 
kiuneyder, s. m. a calmer.  
kiuttagh, a. left handed; Jud. iii. 15: Agh tra 
ren cloan Israel accan gys y Chiarn, hrog y 
Chiarn seose daue fendeilagh, Ehud mac Gera, 
Benjamite, dooinney kiuttagh: as leshyn hug 
cloan Israel gioot gys Eglon ree Voab. But 
when the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, 
the Lord raised them up a deliverer, Ehud the 
son of Gera, a Benjamite, a man lefthanded: 
and by him the children of Israel sent a present 
unto Eglon the king of Moab.  
kyttagh, a. See kiuttagh, left handed.  
laue chiuttagh, a. the left hand. K 
koinney, s. m. ling, heather, gorse.  
yn choinney, s. the heath, ling, or gorse. K 
nyn goinney, s. your, &c. heath, ling, 
&c. K 
koinnee, a. d. of ling or gorse.  
choinnee a. d. of heath or gorse. K 
koinney-aadjin, s. gorse ling.  
koinney-freaie, s. heather ling.  
koir, s. f. a box, a chest; pl. koiyr.  
kred, s. m. a grunt, a hem, the act of 
discharging the breath with force; a sigh is 
made by drawing in the breath, this by 
forcing it out, a weak cough. 
yn chred, s. the hem, &c. See kred. K 
kred, v. hem, &c.; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
kredal or kredyragh, v. grunting, or 
discharging the breath short with force.  
krink, s. m. a knight; Par. Lost; pl. -yn.  
krinkys, s. m. knighthood.  
kritlagh, s. m. the refuse of a worn out 
garment. [See also fritlag.] 
kuckl or kucklee, v. dry after rain; -agh, 77; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
kuckley, s. m. an interval of dry weather 
after rain; pl. 67 [change -ey to -aghyn].  
kurn, s. m. a can; pl. -yn.  
yn churn, s. the can. K 
kuse, s. f. a quantity; pl. -yn.  
e chuse, s. his quantity. K 
kute, a. keen, acute, cunning.  
kutremys, s. m. a selected portion.  
kyndagh, conj. because of, on account of.  
kyndagh, a. ‘guilty’ 
s’kyndagh, a. how much because of, how 
criminal or guilty. K 
s’kyndee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. K 
kyndagh, s. m. the guilty one; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
yn chyndagh, s. 6. the guilty person or 
thing. K 
by-chyndagh, adv. because of.  
by-dty-chyndagh, adv. because of thee, in 
consequence of thee; Jer. xxxviii. 23: …as 
by-dty-chyndagh loshtee ad yn ard-valley 
shoh lesh aile. … and thou shalt cause this city 
to be burned with fire.  
meechyndagh, a. inculpable; s. m. an 
inculpable or an unblamable person; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. 
neu-chyndagh, a. 6. unblamable, free from 
crime; s. m. a blameless, person.  
202 
K 
 
kyndid, s. m. guilt, guilt[in]ess.  
e chyndid, s. 6. his guilt or guiltiness. K 
kynney, s. m. kindred; pl. 68 [change -ey to 
-eeyn].  
dty chynney, s. thy kindred. K 
kys, adv. (from quis or fys), how.  
kys te, adv. p. how is it [?].  
kys t’ee, adv. p. how is she [?]; -ish, id. em.  
kys t’eh, adv. p. how is he [?].  
kys teshyn, adv. p. id. em.  
kys t’ad, adv. p. how are they [?]; -syn, id. 
em.  
kys ta mee, adv. p. how am I [?] 
kys ta mish, id. em.  
kys tou, adv. p. how art thou [?]; -uss, id. 
em.  
kys ta shiu, adv. p. how are you or ye [?]; 
-ish, id. em.  
kys v’ad, adv. p. how were they [?]; -syn, 
id. em.  
kys v’oo or vou, adv. p. how wert thou [?]; 
-uss, id. em.  
203 
L 
 
L 
This letter is one of the immutable consonants 
as set forth in first Remark, and also in 18th. 
laa, s. m. day. Prov. “Tra hig y laa hig e<h> 
choyrle lesh.” [When the day comes its 
counsel will come with it.] 
laghyn, s. pl. days; the pl. of laa.  
laa jeh’n vee, s. day of the month.  
laa ny nuyr, s. the next day after to-
morrow.  
laa ny vair<r>agh, s. lit. the morrow day.  
laa-bleeney, s. m. anniversary day.  
laa-chaie, s. the other day. This chaie 
comes from caghlaa (change), the change 
of a day.  
laa-feailley, s. a holy day, a festive day.  
Laa-Innyd, s. m. Ash Wednesday, the first 
day of Lent; from aoin or oine (a fast); it 
ought to be Laa-Aoinyd (a day of fasting); 
though we have it not for fasting, It is in the 
Erse.  
laa’l, s. (laa and eail), day and festival, but 
perhaps ought to be from laa and oiel, the 
day and night of, or the vigil of the festival 
day.  
Laa’l Breeshey, s. the feast of St. Brede or 
Bridget, kept on the first of February. Prov. 
“Laa’l Breeshey bane,  
dy choolley yeeig lane,  
dy ghoo ny dy vane;” [White St. Bridget’s 
Day; every ditch full of black or of white] 
and,  
“Choud as hig y scell greinney stiagh Laa’l 
Breeshey, hig y sniaghtey my jig Laa 
Boayldyn.” [As long as the sunshine 
appears on St. Bridget’s Day, the snow will 
come before May Day.] 
Laa’l Çhybbyr-Ushtey, s. m. Epiphany-
day. This ought to be Laa’l çhebbal 
ooashley, the day of offering worship, as 
the wise men of the East did, of which it is 
a commemoration.  
Laa’l maccan; (Innocent’s day),  
Laa’l Moirrey ny Gianle, s. m. 
Candlemas-day, kept on the second of 
February. Prov. “Laa’l Moirrey ny Gianle, 
lieh foddyr as lieh aile.” [Mary’s Feast Day 
of the candle[s], i.e., Candlemas, half 
fodder and half fire.] 
Laa’l Moirrey ny Sansh or Sanish, s. m. 
the Annunciation-day, kept by the church 
on the 25th day of March.  
Laa’l Parick, s. m. St. Patrick’s day or 
Patrick-mas day, the festival of St. Patrick, 
kept on the 17th day of March. “Laa’l 
Parick arree yn dow gys e staik as y 
dooinney gys e lhiabbee.” [St. Patrick’s 
Day in spring the ox to his stake and the 
man to his bed.] 
Laa’l Paul, s. m. St. Paul’s day, held the 
25th day of January.  
“Laa’l Paul ghorrinagh gheayee, 
Ghenney er y theihll as baase-mooar sleih. 
Laa’l Paul aalin as glen,  
Palçhey er y theihll dy arroo as meinn.” 
[St. Paul’s Day stormy and windy, famine 
in the world and great mortality among 
people; St. Paul’s Day fair and clean, 
plenty in the world of corn and meal.] 
laa-shynnee, s. a fox day. 
ard-laa, s. m. a high day; John, xix. 31: 
Shen-y-fa son dy nee laa yn aarlaghey ve, as 
nagh beagh ny kirp er y chrosh er laa yn 
doonaght (son va’n doonaght shen ny ard-laa) 
ghuee ny Hewnyn er Pilate, ny lurgaghyn oc dy 
ve brisht, as ad dy ve goit ersooyl. The Jews 
therefore, because it was the preparation, that 
the bodies should not remain upon the cross on 
the sabbath day, (for that sabbath day was an 
high day), besought Pilate that their legs might 
be broken, and that they might be taken away.  
cour-y-laa, a. daily, by the day, diurnal.  
laaoil, a. daily, diurnal; Dan. viii. 11: As va 
pooar-caggee er ny choyrt da noi yn oural-
laaoil, kyndagh rish drogh-yannoo, as cheau 
eh sheese yn ynrickys gys y thalloo. And an 
host was given him against the daily sacrifice 
by reason of transgression, and it cast down 
the truth to the ground.  
laad, s. m. a load, burden; pl. -yn. 
laad, v. load, burden; -agh, 77 -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
laadey, v. loading, burdening.  
laadit, 85. loaded, laden.  
s’laadit, a. how loaded or laden. K 
anlaadit, unloaded; disburdened; 85.  
laadeyder, s. m. one who loads; pl. -yn. 
204 
L 
 
laaee 
my[-]laee, a. with the descent, drooping. 
kione my-laee, s. the drooping or lower 
end. 
laag 
camlaagagh, a. crooked, or contrary to 
law, (perhaps from camleighagh), intricate, 
perverse; s. m. a froward person; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]; Job, v. 13: T’eh goaill y 
vooinjer chluicagh ayns y chialgeyrys oc hene; 
as cur shaghrynys er coyrle ny camlaagee. He 
taketh the wise in their own craftiness: and the 
counsel of the froward is carried headlong. 
laagh, s. f. mire, mud, slush; pl. -yn. 
laagh, v. to cover with mire, &c.; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
laaghey, a. d. of mire or mud.  
laaghit, 85. mired, mudded.  
laaghagh, a. miry, full of mud.  
s’laghagh, a. how miry.  
s’laghee or s’laghey, a. more or most miry. 
L 
laaghan, s. a slough, a place of mire. 
laair, s. f. a mare; pl. -eeyn. 
laan, s. m. a stud, a mould; pl. -yn. Cant. v. 
1[5]: Ta ny lurgaghyn echey myr pillaryn 
marble soit er laanyn dy airh ghlen, ta’n eddin 
echey myr Lebanon, thollee myr ny cedaryn. 
His legs are as pillars of marble, set upon 
sockets of fine gold: his countenance is as 
Lebanon, excellent as the cedars.  
laare, s. f. a floor; pl. -yn. 
laarey, a. d. of the floor.  
laare-vooie or laare-voaillee, s. the 
threshing or winnowing floor. 
mwyllin laare, s. f. a floor mill. 
laareyder, s. m. a floorer; pl. -yn.  
laareagh, s. f. a flooring; pl. -yn.  
laare, v. floor; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
laareaghey, v. putting on the floor.  
laareit, 85. floored.  
laatçh, v. lace; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
laatçhey, v. lacing.  
laatçhit, 85. laced.  
s’laatshit, a. how laced. L 
laatçhey, s. m. a lace; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
laatçhagh, a. d. of lace.  
s’laatshagh, a. how laced or covered with 
lace. L  
s’laatshee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. L 
laatçheyder, s. m. a lacer; pl. -yn.  
labb, s. m. a blow, a severe blow. 
lab, s. m. a lot, a great quantity. 
labb, v. strike severe[ly]; -agh, 77; -ys, 88.  
labbal, v. striking with something heavy.  
labbit, 85. struck, &c.  
labbeyder, s. m. a striker with weight.  
labr or labree, v. labour, work; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88.  
labrit, 85. laboured, wrought.  
s’labrit, a. how laboured. L 
labree, s. m. a labourer, a worker.  
laboree or labreeyn, s. pl. workers, 
helpers; Rom. xvi. 3: Bannee-jee Priscilla as 
Aquila my cho-laboree ayns Creest Yeesey. 
Greet Priscilla and Aquila my helpers in Christ 
Jesus.  
laboraght, s. m. labour, work; pl. -yn. 
laccal, s. m. want, lack. 
laccal, v. wanting, lacking. Prov. “Tra ta 
fer laccal ben, cha vel eh laccal agh ben, 
Agh tra ta ben echey, t’eh laccal ymmodee 
glen.” [When a man wants a wife, he wants 
nothing but a wife; but when he has a wife, 
he wants many (things) clean.] 
laccallagh, s. m. one in want; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. See also ymmyrchagh. 
lagg, s. m. a hollow; pl. see ligg.  
ligg, s. pl. hollows; the pl. of lagg.  
laggan, s. a hollow, a dimple; pl. -yn. 
lah, s. m. lad. Dr. Kelly in his Manks 
grammar says lah means sir; but I think it 
cannot mean that, as it is only used in 
familiar conversation; the feminine of 
which is yah.  
lahn, v. mash; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 88; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
lahney, v. mashing.  
lahnit, 85. mashed. 
lahneyder, s. m. a masher.  
205 
L 
 
laiy, v. lay; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ym, 86; 
-ys, 88.  
laiyal, v. laying.  
laiyt, 85. laid; Exod. xxvi. 32: As nee oo 
croghey ad er kiare pillaryn dy fuygh-shittim 
laiyt harrish lesh airh. And thou shalt hang it 
upon four pillars of shittim wood overlaid with 
gold. 
lajer, a. strong.  
s’lajer, a. how strong. For the comp. and 
sup. of this word see stroshey. L 
stroshey, a. stronger, strongest, the comp. 
and sup. of lajer and troshagh.  
lajerey, a. pl. strong.  
lajeragh or lajerys, a. d. of strength; Ez. 
xlv. 9: …cur-jee veue tranlaase as spooilley, 
as jean-jee briwnys as cairys, trog-jee nyn laue-
lajerys veih my phobble. …remove violence 
and spoil, and execute judgment and justice, 
take away your exactions from my people.  
kione lajeragh, a. headstrong; Hos. iv. 16: 
Son ta Israel creoi-wannallagh, myr colbagh 
kione-lajeragh. For Israel slideth back as a 
backsliding heifer. 
lajerid, s. m. strength, potency. 
lane, a. full, much; s. a deal, much. Prov. “Ta 
lane eddyr raa as jannoo;” [There is much 
between saying and doing] and, “Ta lane 
caillit eddyr y laue as y veeal.” [There is 
much lost between the hand and the 
mouth.] 
laane. See lane; Luke, v. 36: Cha vel 
dooinney erbee cur peesh dy eaddagh noa er 
shenn gharmad: er-nonney, ta chammah yn 
noa raipey yn laane lesh, as cha vel yn pheesh 
va goit ass yn noa coardail rish y chenn. No 
man putteth a piece of a new garment upon an 
old; if otherwise, then both the new maketh a 
rent, and the piece that was taken out of the 
new agreeth not with the old.  
laney, a. pl. full.  
lane-doarn, s. f. a handful.  
lane-duirn or laneyn-duirn, s. pl. 
handfuls, fistfuls.  
lane fo, s. defiance; v. to defy.  
lane marrey, s. m. high water.  
lane marrey traie, s. turned on the ebb.  
lane vie, a. indifferent, middling, very well.  
baare-y-lane, s. m. high-water-mark. 
lung-lane, a. quite full; Ez. xxviii. 16: 
Liorish ymmodee dty varchantys, t’ad er dty 
lhieeney lung-lane dy hranlaase, as t’ou er 
n’yannoo peccah. By the multitude of thy 
merchandise they have filled the midst of thee 
with violence, and thou hast sinned. 
laneid, s. m. fulness, repletion, satiety.  
lannoon, s. m. a twin; pl. -yn.  
lannoonagh, a. d. of twins. 
lansh, s. m. a great deal; pl. -yn. 
lant, s. f. the lap of one board on another in 
clinch built vessels. pl. -yn.  
laue, s. f. a hand; pl. -yn.  
lauey, a. d. of the hand or hands.  
laue-ry-laue, adv. hand in hand.  
laue-scriuee, s. f. manuscript.  
laue yn eaghtyr, adv. the upper or whip 
hand, victory.  
laue my height, s. m. a hand suit, bound to 
prosecute by giving the hand to the coroner 
or lockman on searching for stolen goods.  
argid-laue, s. m. ready money, cash. 
ass-laue, adv. p. without delay, quickly. 
barrey laue, s. f. a hand barrow 
fo[-]laue, s. m. a note of hand, a promissory 
note, a certificate or receipt under a 
person’s hand, or from his hand; pl. -yn; or 
fogh<->yn[-]laue.  
fo-e-laue, adv. under his hand, his 
subscription; Isa. xliv. 5: Jir fer, Lesh y 
Chiarn mish; as gowee fer elley ennym Yacob 
er hene; as ver fer elley fo-e-laue gys y 
Chiarn, as sliennooys eh-hene er cowrey Israel. 
One shall say, I am the Lord’s; and another 
shall call himself by the name of Jacob; and 
another shall subscribe with his hand unto the 
Lord, and surname himself by the name of 
Israel.  
fo-laue-aspick, s. m. confirmation.  
maidjey laue, s. m. a walking stick. 
mwannal laue, s. f. the wrist, pl. 
mwannallyn laue. 
mwyllin laue, s. f. a hand mill. 
my-laue, after çheet it is an adv. going on, 
coming on, going forward, getting better in 
health or circumstances. 
rolaue, adv. before, beforehand. 
sollaghey-laue, s. a bribe, something put 
into the hand to pervert the judgment; 
206 
L 
 
Micah, vii. 3: Dy vod ad dy jeean cur-rish olk, 
lesh nyn ghaa laue: ta’n prince geearree leagh, 
as yn briw shirrey sollaghey-laue. That they 
may do evil with both hands earnestly, the 
prince asketh, and the judge asketh for a 
reward.  
lauee, a. handy, dexterous.  
s’lauee, a. how handy, comp. and sup.  
lhag-lauee, a. faint-handed, feeble-handed. 
lhome-lauee, a. empty-handed. 
neu-lauee, a. unhandy. 
laueys, s. m. handiness, speed; <v.> 
performed in a handy, dexterous, skilful 
manner.  
lauean, ‘glove’ 
lauenyn, s. pl. gloves. 
leac, s. f. a flat stone, a slate; pl. -yn.  
lhic, s. pl. slates, flat stones. 
leagh, s. m. reward, price, recompense; 
compensation; in Ez. xxii. 12 it is gifts: 
Aynyd’s t’ad er ghoaill leagh son deayrtey fuill. 
In thee have they taken gifts to shed blood.  
leagh-shiaullee, s. fare, payment of 
passage; Jonah, i. 3: …as hooar eh lhong goll 
gys Tarshish: myr shen deeck eh yn leagh-
shiaullee, as hie eh er boayrd, dy gholl maroo 
gys Tarshish, veih fenish y Chiarn. …and he 
found a ship going to Tarshish: so he paid the 
fare thereof, and went down into it, to go with 
them unto Tarshish from the presence of the 
Lord.  
leagh-mooar, a. precious, valuable. 
mooar-leagh, a. precious, valuable; Pro. 
vi. 26: Son liorish drogh-ven ta dooinney 
tayrnit sheese gys boghtynid: as nee ben 
adultrinagh shelg son y vioys mooar-leagh. 
For by means of a whorish woman a man is 
brought to a piece of bread: and the adulteress 
will hunt for the precious life. 
leaghyr or laghyr, s. f. coarse grass like 
rushes; from laagh (mire), and aiyr (grass), 
it grows in meadows in miry places.  
jargan-leoighyr, s. m. a lizard. 
leah, adv. soon, early.  
s’leah, a. how soon or shortly. L 
s’leaïe, a. id., comp. and sup; Heb. xii. 9: 
Ny-sodjey, ta er ve ain ayraghyn dooghyssagh, 
dreill shin fo smaght, as hug shin arrym daue: 
nagh der mayd eisht foddey sleaïe biallys da 
Ayr ny spyrrydyn, as ve bio? Furthermore we 
have had fathers of our flesh which corrected 
us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not 
much rather be in subjection unto the Father of 
spirits, and live? L 
leaum, s. m. a sudden heavy shower of rain, a 
squelch.  
leayr or lheear, a. clear, evident. 
[s’leayr], v. seeing, perceiving. See 
Remarks 167 and 168. <S> 
b[’]leayr, v. saw clearly, did see.  
çhionn[-]leayrtys, s. m. the time between 
day-break and sunrise, and sunset and 
night; pl. -yn. 
co[-]leayrtys, s. twilight, partaking of light 
and darkness. 
com[-]leayrtys, s. m. the time between day-
break and sunrise, and sunset and night. 
The word is in its aspirated state in Josh. ii. 
5: As haink eh gy-kione mysh traa dooney ny 
giattey, ’sy chomleayrtys, dy jagh ny deiney 
magh. And it came to pass about the time of 
shutting of the gate, when it was dark, that the 
men went out; pl. -yn. 
leayst, v. rock, reel, swing, stagger; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
lheayst. See leayst.  
leaystey, v. rocking, reeling, staggering; 
Job, xii. 25: T’ad rasey ’sy dorraghys fegooish 
soilshey, as t’eh cur orroo dy leaystey myr 
dooinney meshtal. They grope in the dark 
without light, and he maketh them to stagger 
like a drunken man.  
leaystit, 85. rocked, swung.  
leaysteyder, s. m. one who rocks, &c., a 
rocker.  
leaystane, s. m. a thing to rock or swing on; 
pl. -yn. 
leeid, v. lead, conduct; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
leeideil, v. leading, conducting.  
leeidit, 85. led, guided.  
s’leeidit, a. how led or directed. L 
leeideilagh, s. m. a leader, a conductor; pl. 
71 [change -agh to -ee].  
leeideilagh purtey, s. m. a pilot.  
ard-leeid[eil]agh, s. m. a captain; Josh. v. 
[13-]14: Vel uss er y cheu ainyn, ny son nyn 
207 
L 
 
noidyn? As dooyrt eshyn, Cha nee nyn ’oï; agh 
myr ard-leeideilagh sheshaght caggee yn 
Chiarn ta mish er jeet. Art thou for us, or for our 
adversaries? And he said, Nay; but as captain 
of the host of the Lord am I now come. 
leeideilys, s. m. guidance, direction.  
leggad, s. m. a legacy; pl. -yn.  
leggad, s. m. a person to liking; a custom in 
former times of calling a lad and lass to be 
together at a supper, &c.; pl. -yn. 
leigh, s. f. law; pl. -aghyn; French, loi.  
leigh ny hagglish, s. f. canon law.  
anleigh, s. m. partiality in law.  
anleighagh, a. contrary to law.  
leighder, s. m. a lawyer, a pleader; pl. -yn.  
leighderaght, v. at law, suing at law, 
pleading at court.  
leighderys, s. m. practice at law.  
leighoil, a. lawful.  
leighoilid or leighoilys, s. lawfulness. 
leih, s. m. forgiveness. 
leih, v. forgive; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
dy leih, v. to forgive; Mat. vi. 14: Son my 
leihys shiuish da deiney nyn loghtyn, leihee 
nyn Ayr flaunyssagh myrgeddin diuish. For if ye 
forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly 
Father will also forgive you.  
leiht, 85. forgiven, pardoned.  
s’leiht, a. how forgiven. 
lent, s. m. the lower edge of any thing that 
hangs down, the skirt; pl. -yn; opposed to 
fent.  
leoaie, s. f. lead, metal; pl. -yn.  
leoaiey, a. pl. leaden. [?i.e. a. d.] 
leoaiey, a. d. of lead. 
leod, v. derogate, detract, disesteem, 
undervalue, dislike; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
leodaghey, v. becoming less in esteem or 
value, becoming disliked; Eccl. x. 1: Myr ta 
beishteigyn marroo breinnaghey ooil chostal yn 
photecaree: myr shen ta kuse dy ommijys 
leodaghey eshyn, ta ayns goo mie son 
creenaght as ooashley. Dead flies cause the 
ointment of the apothecary to send forth a 
stinking savour: so doth a little folly him that is 
in reputation for wisdom and honour. Prov. 
“Ta rouyr çhebbyn mie leodaghey 
mitçhoor.” [Too many good offers degrade 
a rogue.] 
leodit, 85. disesteemed, disrespected, 
disliked, derogated.  
s’leodit, a. how derogated. L 
leoie, s. f. ashes.  
leoh, a. d. of ashes. 
lesh, pre. with, towards; p. p. belonging to 
him, his.  
liesh, p. See lesh. Both words are used.  
leshyn, id. em.  
lesh[-]hene, p. p. his own, belonging to 
himself.  
lh’ee, p. her own, belonging to her, hers; 
Job, xxxix. 16: T’ee creoghit noi e eeanlee, 
myr nagh beagh ad lh’ee hene: ta’n obbyr eck 
ayns fardail gyn aggle. She is hardened against 
her young ones, as though they were not her’s: 
her labour is in vain without fear; -ish, id. em.  
lhieu, p. p. with them, theirs; -syn, id. em.  
lhiam, p. mine, my, belonging to me, with 
me; -s, id. em.  
lhiam-lhiat, s. an inconstant or unsteady 
person.  
lhien, p. p. with us, ours, belonging to us; 
-yn, id. em. See also lhian. Heb. xii. 25: 
Jeeagh-jee nagh der shin cooyl rishyn ta loayrt: 
son mannagh ren adsyn scapail hug cooyl 
rishyn ren loayrt er y thalloo, foddey smoo cha 
jig eh lhienyn, my hyndaa-ys mayd ersooyl 
voishyn ta loayrt veih niau. See that ye refuse 
not him that speaketh. For if they escaped not 
who refused him that spake on earth, much 
more shall not we escape, if we turn away from 
him that speaketh from heaven.  
lhian, pro. our, ours, belonging to us, with 
us; -yn, id. em.  
lhiat, pro. thine, belonging to thee, with 
thee, and sometimes thou; as, cur lhiat eh 
(bring thou him or it); -s, id. em. Prov. 
“Lhiat myr hoil oo.” [(Be it) to thee as thou 
deservest.] 
lhieu, p. p. with you or ye, yours; -ish, id. 
em.  
lesh-traa, adv. deliberately.  
lesh-y-cheilley, adv. one with another.  
lesh y choonid, adv. rather narrow.  
s’leish or s’lesh, v. belonging to, owning, 
208 
L 
 
owneth, &c. L 
b[’]lesh or by-liesh, s. m. ownership.  
 by-liesh, adv. belonging to, owner or 
owners of.  
 by-lesh, his, belonging to him; -yn, id. 
em; Obadiah, 14: Chamoo lhisagh oo v’er 
hassoo ’syn aa-gherrit, dy yiarey jeh adsyn by 
leshyn ren scapail; chamoo lhisagh oo v’er 
livrey seose adsyn by-leshyn va er-mayrn ’sy 
laa seaghnagh Neither shouldest thou have 
stood in the crossway, to cut off those of his 
that did escape; neither shouldest thou have 
delivered up those of his that did remain in the 
day of distress.  
 b[’]leshin, v. belonging to him.  
 by-lhieu, adv. belonging to them.  
cur-lesh, v. bringing, carrying, &c.  
er-lesh, p. he conceives or imagines; -yn, 
id. em.  
 er-lhiee, p. she imagines, &c.; -ish, id. 
em.  
 er-lhieu, p. they, &c. conceive, &c.; 
-syn, id. em.  
 er-lhiam, p. methinks, I conceive, or 
imagine.  
 er-lhien, p. we imagine or conceive; 
-yn, id. em.  
 er-lhiat, p. thou conceivest, &c.; -s, id. 
em.  
 er-lhieu, p. ye or you conceive, &c.; 
-ish, id. em. 
leshtal, s. m. (from lieh skeeal) an excuse. 
Prov. “Cha daink rieau yn baase gyn 
leshtal.” [Death never came without an 
excuse.] 
leshtal croobagh, s. a lame excuse.  
leshtalagh, s. m. an excuser; a. excusable 
or excusatory. 
lessoon, s. f. a lesson; pl. -yn.  
leydee 
kiark my-leydee, s. f. a goldfinch. 
lhag, a. loose, slack.  
lag, a. loose, slack, not tight. See lhag.  
s’lag, a. how slack or loose.  
s’laggey, a. id., comp. and sup.  
lhag-chreeagh, a. faint-hearted.  
lhag-hastagh, a. weak in knowledge or 
understanding; Pro. xvii. 18: [NB the 
citation has lhag-hushtagh, to which the 
definition rather corresponds, not lhag-
hastagh] Ta’n dooinney lhag-hushtagh coyrt 
e laue, as t’eh goll raane fenish e charrey. A 
man void of understanding striketh hands, and 
becometh surety in the presence of his friend].  
lhag-lauee, a. faint-handed, feeble-handed.  
lhag-laynt, s. m. indisposition.  
lhag-layntagh, a. indisposed, slightly 
disordered.  
lhag-stayd, a. impotent; Jud. vi. 6: As va 
Israel er ny injillaghey gys lhag stayd kyndagh 
rish ny Midianiteyn; as deïe cloan Israel gys y 
Chiarn. And Israel was greatly impoverished 
because of the Midianites; and the children of 
Israel cried unto the Lord.  
lhagg* or lhaggee, v. slacken, loosen; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
lhaggaghey, v. loosening, slackening; Dan. 
v. 6: Eisht va eddin y ree er ny chaghlaa, as va 
sneih er e aigney, myr shen dy row juntyn e 
veeghyn er ny lhaggaghey, as woaill e 
ghlioonyn noi-ry-hoi. Then the king’s 
countenance was changed, and his thoughts 
troubled him, so that the joints of his loins were 
loosed, and his knees smote one against 
another; 2 Kings, iv. 24: As yeelt ee assyl, as 
dooyrt ee rish e sharvaant, Eiyr, as cur er dty 
hoshiaght; ny lhaggee dty imman er my hon’s, 
mannagh jir-ym rhyt. Then she saddled an ass, 
and said to her servant, Drive, and go forward; 
slack not thy riding for me, except I bid thee; 
Isa. xxxiii. 23: Ta dty choyrdyn er ny 
lhaggaghey; cha row fort ayndoo dy yannoo 
shickyr yn chroan; cha row dy niart ayndoo dy 
skeayley yn shiaull. Thy tacklings are loosed; 
they could not well strengthen their mast, they 
could not spread the sail.  
s’lhaggit, a. how slackened or loosened. L 
s’laggit, a. how loosened or slackened. L 
lhaih, v. read; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
lhaiht, 85. read.  
s’lhaiht, a. how read, or often read. L 
lhaihder, s. m. a reader; pl. -yn. 
lhampane, s. m. a languid, weak, limber, not 
stiff person; pl. -e. [pl. of lhampanagh] 
lhampanagh, a. languid, limber, childish.  
209 
L 
 
lhampanid or lhampanys, s. m. langour, 
want of stiffness, debility. 
lhangeid, s. m. a lanket; pl. -yn. 
lhannee, s. f. church-land, glebe-land; as, 
thalloo lhannee.  
lhap, v. lap, double; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
lhappal, v. lapping, doubling, folding.  
lhappit, 85. lapped, doubled, folded. 
lhargagh, s. f. a descent, declivity, a sloping 
side of a hill or mountain, down the hill; 
opposed to ughtagh; pl. lhargeeyn.  
liargagh, s. m. a declivity or descent. See 
also lhargagh.  
lhargee, a. d. of descent or declivity, of 
declining or sloping ground.  
liargee, a. d. of declivity or going down; 
Jer. xlviii. 5: Son ec ughtagh Luhith, nee 
keayney kinjagh goll seose; as ec liargee 
Horonaim, ta ny noidyn er chlashtyn eam dy 
hoyrt-mow. For in the going up of Luhith 
continual weeping shall go up; for in the going 
down of Horonaim the enemies have heard a 
cry of destruction. 
lhead* or lheadee, v. starve with cold; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84;-ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
dy lheadey, v. to starve with cold.  
er lhea, v. hath, &c. starved with cold.  
lheamys, s. m. a blemish; pl. -yn.  
lheamysagh, a. defective, having 
blemishes.  
lheamysid, s. m. defectiveness.  
lheamysit, 85. blemished, deformed. 
lhean, a. broad, wide.  
s’lhean, a. how broad or wide. L  
s’lhea, a. id., comp. and sup. L 
shlea, a. broader, wider, broadest, widest; 
the com. and sup. of lhean.  
lheaney, a. pl. broad, wide.  
co[-]lhean, adv. as wide, equally broad. 
Colhean coliauyr (as broad as long). 
jiulean or jiuleanagh, s. m. a sojourner, a 
person that stays but a day or two, as the 
word would indicate, a cotler, or tenant. 
scaa[-]lhean, s. m. a broad scatter; pl. -yn. 
skaalhean (sic: stress), s. f. dispersion, 
shed abroad; Jer. xxv. 34: Gull-jee, shiuish 
vochillyn, as keayn-jee as seiy-jee shiu hene 
’sy joan, shiuish leeideilee y chioltane: son ta 
laghyn nyn stroie as nyn scaalhean er jeet 
mygeayrt; as tuittee shiu ayns peeshyn myr 
saagh craie costal. Howl, ye shepherds, and 
cry; and wallow yourselves in the ashes, ye 
principal of the flock: for the days of your 
slaughter and of your dispersions are 
accomplished; and ye shall fall like a pleasant 
vessel. See also scaalhean. 
lheanagh or lheanaghey, v. widening, &c.  
lheanit, 85. sprained; widened.  
lheaney, s. a sprain; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
lus y lheaney, s. f. bindweed, convolvulus. 
lheead, s. m. breadth, width; pl. -yn. 
lhee 
fer-lhee, s. m. a physician, a doctor or 
surgeon. 
lheihys, v. heal, cure a wound.  
gyn-lheihys, adv. incurable; 2 Chron. xxi. 
18: As lurg shoh ooilley woaill y Chiarn eh ’sy 
volg lesh doghan gyn-lheihys. And after all this 
the Lord smote him in his bowels with an 
incurable disease.  
lus-lheihys, s. f. Solomon’s seal or heal; a 
species of bell-wort. 
saase-lheihys, s. m. medicine; Jer. xlvi. 11: 
…ayns fardail nee oo goaill ymmodee 
saaseyn-lheihys; son cha bee oo er dty 
laanaghey. …in vain shalt thou use many 
medicines; for thou shalt not be cured. 
dy lheihysagh, a. medical, healing. 
lheeah, a. hoary, gray, mouldy.  
s’lheeah, a. how hoary or gray, comp. and 
sup. L 
lheeah-rio, s. f. hoar-frost.  
cleaysh-lheeah, s. f. a moss that grows on 
rocks, and is used in dying red. 
keeir-lheeah, s. m. those two colours of 
wool spun and wove into cloth are so 
called, and which was formerly the garb 
generally worn by the Manks peasantry. 
lheeaghey, v. getting hoary, gray, or 
mouldy.  
lheeaghys, s. m. hoariness, grayness, 
mouldiness. 
lheean, s. m. the floor on which the meal falls 
from a flour mill. 
210 
L 
 
lheeannee, s. f. a meadow.  
lheeantyn, s. pl. meadows.  
lheeannagh, a. d. of a meadow or 
meadows.  
lheeannag, s. f. a small meadow.  
lheegh, s. f. a ladle; pl. -yn. 
lheh 
er-lheh, adv. apart, separately, severally, 
privately, chiefly; a. private, particular. 
lheibeidjagh, a. unwieldy, cumberous.  
s’lheibbidjagh, a. how unwieldy, &c. L 
s’lheibbidjee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. 
L 
lheibeidjys or lheibeidjid, s. m. 
unwieldiness. 
lheid, pro. such, like, of that kind. 
lheie, v. melt, dissolve, soften, grow tender; 
disappear; -agh,77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
lheieder, s. m. a melter, a dissolver, a 
founder; Jer. vi. 29, it is spelled lheeider: 
Ta ny builg-sheidee losht, ta’n leoie er n’gholl 
naardey ’syn aile; ta’n lheeider lheïe ayns 
fardail; son cha vel ny meechrauee er ny 
ghaartlian ass. The bellows are burned, the 
lead is consumed of the fire; the founder 
melteth in vain: for the wicked are not plucked 
away; but in Jer. li. 17, it is lheieder: …ta 
keeayl dy chooilley lheieder lheïe ersooyl 
marish e yalloo grainnit: son cha vel y jalloo 
lheït agh fardail, as cha vel ennal ayndoo. 
…every founder is confounded by the graven 
image: for his molten image is falsehood, and 
there is no breath in them; pl. -yn.  
lheie er sooyl, v. to dwindle away by 
degrees; to wear off, to vanish.  
lheiht or lheit, 85. melted, dissolved, 
liquified. 
lheih, s. f. a place at sea noted for fishing on, 
by some called aahley. 
lheihll or lheil, v. move, stir about slowly or 
heavily, use of limbs; Acts, xiv. 8: As va ny 
hoie ec Lystra dooinney dy row va er choayl 
lheihll e choshey, va ny vaccagh veih brein e 
vayrey, as nagh ren rieau shooyl. And there sat 
a certain man at Lystra, impotent in his feet, 
being a cripple from his mother’s womb, who 
never had walked.  
lheiltagh, s. m. a mover, one who can use 
or exercise his limbs; pl. -yn.  
anlheiltagh, s. m. a person unable to move 
or help himself; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]. 
lheiltys, s. m. exercise, motion. 
anlheil or anlheiltys, s. m. <unable> 
[inability] to move about, imbecility, 
helplessness. 
lheim, s. m. a leap, jump, limp, an embrace of 
animals; pl. -yn. 
lheim, v. leap, &c.; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
lheimyragh or lheimyraght, v. skipping, 
hopping, leaping, &c.; Acts, iii. 8: As lheim 
eh seose, as hass eh, as huill eh, as hie eh 
stiagh ayns y chiamble maroo, shooyl as 
lheimyragh, as cur moylley da Jee. And he 
leaping up stood, and walked, and entered with 
them into the temple, walking, and leaping, and 
praising God; Nah. iii. 2: Feiyr y chipp, as 
sheean freaney ny queeylyn, as lheimyraght 
ny cabbil, as leaystey ny fainee. The noise of a 
whip, and the noise of the rattling of the wheels, 
and of the pransing horses, and of the jumping 
chariots.  
lheimmeyder, s. m. one who leaps, a 
jumper; pl. -yn.  
lheimmeyder-faiyr, s. m. a grasshopper.  
lheimmit, 85. leaped, leapt, covered.  
lheim-surley, s. m. a standing-jump. 
blein[-]lheim, s. f. a leap year. 
corlheim, v. hop, leap on one foot. 
tarlheim (sic: stress), v. alight, alighting, 
coming down from a horse or beast on 
which a person rides; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms. 87; -ys, 88. 
harlheim, v. did alight; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. T 
tarlheimit, 85. alighted. 
tarlheiman, s. m. a stile or step, made use 
of when mounting on, or alighting off, a 
beast. 
lheiney, s. f. a shirt.  
lheintyn, s. pl. shirts.  
lheiy, s. m. a calf; pl. -ee; Prov. “Ta booa vie 
ny gha as drogh lheiy ec.” [Many a good 
cow has a bad calf.] 
far-lheiy, s. m. a false conception of a calf, 
211 
L 
 
said to be generated between a cow and 
what is called a tarroo-ushtey. 
lhemeen or lhemyn, s. a moth; pl. -yn.  
lhemeenagh, a. mothy, having moths. 
lheng, s. f. a halfpenny; pl. -yn. 
lherrym, s. the larboard quarter of a boat or 
vessel; pl. -yn. 
lhesh, s. f. the hip; pl. -yn.  
lheshey, a. d. of the hip or hips. 
lheshagh, a. rocking in walking, as if the 
hips were weak.  
lheunican, s. a sty on the eye lash; pl. -yn. 
lhiabbee, s. f. a bed. Some say from liehbee 
(half meat). 
lhiabbaghyn, s. pl. beds. 
lhiabbagh, a. d. of a bed or beds.  
co[-]lhiabbagh, s. m. f. a bed-fellow; a 
concubine; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]. 
lhiann, v. flatten; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
lhiannaghey, v. flattening by pressure, 
mangling, or pressing.  
lhiannit, 85. pressed flat, flattened. 
lhiannag, s. f. a flake; any thing flattened, 
pressed, or made flat; a pea-pod, &c. before 
it is full; as, lhiannag phisheragh.  
lhiannan-shee, s. f. a familiar spirit. 
lhiannoo, s. m. a child. Some say this word is 
from lieh-noo (half a saint).  
lhiennoo, a. d. of children, of the child; 
Mark, ix. 24: As chelleeragh deie ayr y 
lhiennoo, as dooyrt eh lesh jeir, Hiarn, ta mee 
credjal; niartee lesh my chredjue faase. And 
straightway the father of the child cried out, and 
said with tears, Lord, I believe; help thou mine 
unbelief, and Mat. ii. 16; the pl. of lhiannoo: 
Eisht Herod toiggal dy row eh mollit liorish ny 
deiney-creeney, v’eh erskyn-towse eulyssagh, 
as hug eh magh sarey, as varr eh ooilley ny 
lhiennoo-mec v’ayns Bethlehem, as ayns 
ooilley ny ardjyn shen, veih daa vlein dy eash 
as fo, corrym rish y traa v’eh dy imneagh er 
vriaght jeh ny deiney creeney. Then Herod, 
when he saw that he was mocked of the wise 
men, was exceeding wroth, and sent forth, and 
slew all the children that were in Bethlehem, 
and in all the coasts thereof, from two years old 
and under, according to the time which he had 
diligently enquired of the wise men. 
lhiannooagh, a. childish, puerile.  
lhiant, v. cleave, adhere to, stick close to; 
-agh, 77, &c.  
lhiann, v. cleave; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
lhiantyn, v. cleaving, adhering to, sticking 
close to.  
lhiantagh, a. attached, adherent, united 
with, sticking to.  
s’lhiantagh, a. how attached. L 
s’lhiantee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. L 
lhiantys, s. m. attachment, adherence. 
lhiare or liare, s. m. leather. The orthography 
of both these words is used.  
lhiareagh, a. leathern; of leather. 
lhias or lhiasee, v. atone, ransom, amend, 
correct; replenish, manure; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. This verb is supposed to be from 
lheihys and aghey (healing, making 
amends, making up what was lost, 
mending, atoning, healing up the breach); 
and in this way it is understood in manuring 
land, putting some thing on to make it as 
good as before.  
lhiasaghey, v. atoning, ransoming, 
amending, correcting; manuring, 
replenishing.  
lhiasit, 85. atoned, amended, recompensed; 
manured. 
lhiasaghey, s. m. atonement, ransom, 
restitution. 
lhiasagh, s. m. manure; amends, 
recompense. Prov. “Ta dty lhiasagh dty 
ghoarn.” [Thy recompense is thy fist.] 
lhiasee, a. d. of atoning, amending, &c.  
lhiaseyder, s. m. an atoner, amender, 
recompenser; Jer. li. 56: Er-yn-oyr dy vel y 
spooilleyder er jeet urree, eer er Babylon, as ta 
ny deiney niartal eck goit; ta ooilley ny 
bow’ghyn oc brisht, son nee yn Chiarn Jee, yn 
Lhiaseyder, dy shickyr cooilleeney. Because 
the spoiler is come upon her, even upon 
Babylon, and her mighty men are taken, every 
one of their bows is broken: for the Lord God of 
recompences shall surely requite; manurer; pl. 
-yn.  
212 
L 
 
lhiass or lhiassee, v. allege, invent, contrive 
lies and tell them for truth; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88.  
lhiassagh, v. contriving and telling untrue 
stories.  
liassaghey, v. to allege, feign, or contrive 
lies; Neh. vi. 8: Cha vel fockle dy lheid as t’ou 
liassaghey, agh t’ou er hroggal yn goo shoh 
ass dty chree hene. There are no such things 
done as thou sayest, but thou feignest them out 
of thine own heart. See lhia[-].  
dy lhiassaghey, v. to allege, invent, and 
fabricate lies, and tell what is not true of 
your own invention or fabrication.  
lhiasit, 85. alleged, invented, contrived 
falsely, laid against in untruth; Acts, xxv. 
27: Son er-lhiam pene dy row eh red neu 
resoonagh pryssoonagh y choyrt, as gyn 
soilshaghey ny cooishyn va lhiasit n’oï. For it 
seemeth to me unreasonable to send a 
prisoner, and not withal to signify the crimes 
laid against him.  
lhiassee, a. d. of alleging lies. See lhiaee.  
lhiaee-vreag, s. f. a fabricated lie, a falsity 
alleged for truth; nearly of the same 
meaning with breag-lhiassit. The lhiaee in 
this word would be a. d. of false allegation 
or contrivance.  
lhiasseyder, s. m. an alleger of untruths.  
lhiass, adv. needs; 2 Tim. ii. 15: Bee uss 
imneagh dy phrowal oo hene firrinagh gys Jee, 
obbree nagh lhiass nearey ’ghoaill, rheynn dy 
kiart yn goo dy ynrickys. Study to shew thyself 
approved unto God, a workman that needeth 
not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of 
truth.  
liass, adv. See lhiass. S  
lhias dou, adv. need I.  
s’liass, v. need, needeth, needs, &c. L 
shlaiss, adv. needs. 
lhiastey, a. loath, reluctant, slow to do a 
thing.  
liasstagh or liasstey, a. slothful, remiss, 
idle, sluggish, loath to do a thing, indolent, 
inactive. See also lhiasstey.  
s’liastey, a. how loath, comp. and sup. L 
loam-liastey, a. very reluctant or loath. 
liasstid, s. f. sloth, indolence, reluctance, 
slowness, tardiness. 
lhiastyn, v. in debt, owing.  
lhiastynagh, s. m. a debtor, one that owes; 
pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
lhiastynys, s. m. debt. Prov. “Share goll dy 
lhie fegooish shibber na girree ayns 
lhiastynys.” [Better to go to bed supperless 
than to rise in debt.] 
lhiattee, s. f. side; pl. lhiattaghyn or 
lhiatteeyn; 2 Kings, xix. 2[3]: Lesh earroo 
my ainee ta mee er jeet seose gys yrjid ny 
sleityn, gys lhiatteeyn Lebanon, as giare-ym 
sheese e viljyn thollee cedar, as e reih viljyn-
juys: With the multitude of my chariots I am 
come up to the height of the mountains, to the 
sides of Lebanon, and will cut down the tall 
cedar trees thereof, and the choice fir trees 
thereof.  
lhiattee-ry-lhiattee, <s.> [adv.] side by 
side.  
ry-lhiattee, adv. by the side, aside. 
lhiattagh a. d. lateral, of a side or sides. 
jeelt lhiattagh, a side saddle.  
lhie, v. lie, lay down; -agh, 77; -e, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
lhie-ghreiney, s. m. sunset, the setting of 
the sun.  
lhieit or lhiet, 85. laid, lain.  
lhieder, s. m. one that lies down; pl. -yn.  
lhie-nane, v. said of a horse, cow, sheep, 
&c. lying on its back in a hollow, so that it 
cannot rise up of itself.  
lhiaght, s. m. a lying place; a lair, a lodging 
place, a grave, a couch; Amos, iii. 12 [see 
below: cooill-lhiaght]; a tomb, a sepulchre; 
2 Sam. xxi. 14: As craueyn Saul as Yonathan 
e vac, d’oanluck ad ayns cheer Venjamin ayns 
Zelah, ayns lhiaght Kish e ayr. And the bones 
of Saul and Jonathan his son buried they in the 
country of Benjamin in Zelah, in the sepulchre 
of Kish his father; 2 Kings, xxiii. 17: Eisht 
dooyrt eh, Cre’n scrieu shen ta mee dy akin? 
As dinsh deiney yn ard-valley da, Shoh lhiaght 
yn dooinney dy Yee haink veih Judah. Then he 
said, What title is that that I see? And the men 
of the city told him, It is the sepulchre of the 
man of God, which came from Judah; pl. -yn.  
cooill-lhiaght, s. f. a couch; Amos, iii. 12: 
213 
L 
 
…myr shen vees cloan Israel, ta cummal ayns 
Samaria as Damascus, er ny livrey myr veih 
corneil lhiabbagh, ny cooill lhiaght. …so shall 
the children of Israel be taken out that dwell in 
Samaria in the corner of a bed, and in 
Damascus in a couch. 
lhiaght, v. lay in a place, &c.; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
lhiaghtey, v. laying or lodging in a place.  
lhiaghtit, 85. lodged, laid. 
lhiaghteyder, s. m. a layer down or 
depositor.  
lhieen, v. fill, make full; -agh, 77 -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
lhieent, 85. filled, made full.  
liegh-lhieent, a. half-flood or flowed. 
lhieeney, s. m. a filling; pl. 67 [change -ey 
to -aghyn].  
lhieeney-aigney, s. m. satisfaction.  
aa-lhieeney, s. m. second filling, laying 
eggs the second time; to replenish, to fill 
again.  
mooir lhieeney, s. m. the flowing of the 
sea, the flood tide. 
lhieeneyder, s. m. one who fills; pl. -yn.  
lhieeney, s. m. a spasm, pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
lhieg or lhiegg*, v. fell, bring to the ground, 
fall, cast or throw down; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
lhieggit, 85. fallen, felled. 
lhieggey, s. m. a fall, degradation; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn]. Prov. “Yiow moyrn 
lhieggey.” [Pride will have a fall.] 
lhieggey-ushtey, s. m. a waterfall, a 
cataract.  
lhieggeyder, s. m. a feller, one who throws 
down.  
lhiet or lhiett*, v. let, hinder, prevent, stop; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
lhiettal, v. hindering, stopping, preventing, 
staying; Job xxxviii. 37: Cre’n chreenaght 
oddys towse ny bodjallyn? ny quoi oddys moir 
ushtaghyn yn aer y lhiettal? Who can number 
the clouds in wisdom? or who can stay the 
bottles of heaven.  
lhiettalagh, s. m. a hinderer, a prevention; 
pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]; a. preventive, 
obstructive.  
lhiettrimys, lhietrymys, or liettrimys, s. 
m. a hinderance, obstacle, or impediment. 
This word, the orthography of which is 
varied in three instances in the Manks 
Scriptures, is used for difference in Exod. 
xi. 7: Agh noi veg jeh cloan Israel, cha jean 
moddey hene gleashagh e hengey, noi 
dooinney ny baagh: dy vod fys ‘ve eu cre’n 
lhietrymys ta’n Chiarn dy yannoo, eddyr ny 
Egyptianee as Israel. But against any of the 
children of Israel shall not a dog move his 
tongue, against man or beast: that ye may 
know how that the Lord doth put a difference 
between the Egyptians and Israel; Mal. iii. 18: 
Eisht nee shiu chyndaa, as ver shiu 
lhiettrimmys eddyr y dooinney cairal, as mee-
chairal; eddyr eshyn ta shirveish Jee as eshyn 
nagh vel shirveish eh. Then shall ye return, and 
discern between the righteous and the wicked, 
between him that serveth God and him that 
serveth him not; Acts, xv. 9: As cha dug eh 
liettrimys erbee eddyr adsyn as shinyn, 
casherickey ny creeaghyn oc liorish credjue. 
And put no difference between us and them, 
purifying their hearts by faith; Rom. iii. 22: Dy 
jarroo cairys Yee, ta liorish credjue Yeesey 
Creest, dauesyn ooilley, as orroosyn ooilley ta 
credjal; son cha vel liettrimys erbee: Even the 
righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus 
Christ unto all and upon all them that believe: 
for there is no difference:. Would not caghlaa 
or anchaslys, or neuchaslys, have been a 
better word? [Perhaps barrier conveys the 
sense that the translators intended with 
liettrimys.]  
lhiettrimysagh, a. obstructive, hindersome. 
lhieuan, s. m. elm; pl. -yn.  
lhieuanagh, a. d. of elm timber. 
lhig or lhigg*, v. let, permit, suffer, allow, 
gallop, shoot; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
lhig-ort, adv. pretend, feign thyself.  
lhigey, v. galloping. lhigey’n laair vane, 
(running from service).  
lhiggey, v. letting, permitting, shooting. 
The pl. which is according to 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn], is in Zec. iv. 2, for 
214 
L 
 
discharges, pipes, &c.: Ta mee er yeeaghyn, 
as cur-my-ner cainlere slane airhey, as claare 
er e vullagh, as ny shiaght lampyn echey er, as 
shiaght lhiggaghyn gys ny shiaght lampyn va 
er e vullagh. And I said, I have looked, and 
behold a candlestick all of gold, with a bowl 
upon the top of it, and his seven lamps thereon, 
and seven pipes to the seven lamps, which are 
upon the top thereof.  
lhiggit, 85. let, allowed, suffered to be.  
lhiggit, 85. galloped.  
lhiggit-shaghey, 85. postponed, 
procrastinated, let by, delayed.  
lhiggeyder, s. m. one who lets, permits, 
&c.  
lhiggeyder, s. m. one who gallops; pl. -yn.  
’slhig, v. and let or permit. L 
cha b[’]lhig, v. 167. will not let or permit.  
cha b[’]lhigagh, v. would, &c. not let, &c.  
lhimmey, adv. save, except. 
er-lhimmey, adv. except, save. 
lhing, s. m. life time, days of life; Psl. lxxii. 7: 
Ayns y lhing echeysyn nee yn vooinjer 
chairagh bishaghey: dy jarroo, as palchey dy 
hee, choud as ta’n eayst farraghtyn. In his time 
shall the righteous flourish: yea, and 
abundance of peace, so long as the moon 
endureth; Acts, xi. 28: As hass seose fer jeu 
enmyssit Agabus as hoilshee eh liorish y 
Spyrryd dy beagh genney vooar er feaï-ny-
cruinney; shen haink myrgeddin gy-kione rish 
lhing Claudius Cesar. And there stood up one 
of them named Agabus, and signified by the 
Spirit that there should be great dearth 
throughout all the world: which came to pass in 
the days of Claudius Caesar; 2 Kings, xxiii. 
22: Shickyr cha row lheid y chaisht er ny reayll 
er-dy laghyn ny briwnyn ren Israel y vriwnys, ny 
rish lhing reeaghyn Israel, ny reeaghyn Yudah. 
Surely there was not holden such a passover 
from the days of the judges that judged Israel, 
nor in all the days of the kings of Israel, nor of 
the kings of Judah.  
lhingey, s. f. a lisne or cavity in a river 
between rocks. 
lhiondaig, s. f. an even grassy plot in a valley; 
pl. -yn. 
lhionnaig, s. f. a strand or part of a rope or 
cord twisted by itself before it is topped; pl. 
-yn. 
lhis* or lhisagh, v. should, ought; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84. 
lhiy, s. f. a colt; pl. -aghyn, or -nyn. The 
latter is in Jud. x. 4: As va echey jeih mec as 
feed, va markiagh er jeih lhiynyn assyl as feed, 
as va oc jeih ard-valjyn as feed. And he had 
thirty sons that rode on thirty ass colts, and 
they had thirty cities.  
lhiyagh, a. coltish; ticklish. 
lhoau or loau, a. rotten, putrid; Prov. “Leah 
appee leah lhoau.” [Soon ripe soon 
rotten.]. 
s’loau, a. how rotten. L 
s’loauey, a. id., comp. and sup. L 
lhoauey, a. pl. rotten, putrid.  
lhoau or loau, v. rot, putrify; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. Num. v. 22: As dy jed yn ushtey shoh, ta 
cur lesh y mollaght ayns dty vynnagh, dy chur 
er dty volg dy att, as dty lheeassid dy lhoau: 
And this water that causeth the curse shall go 
into thy bowels, to make thy belly to swell, and 
thy thigh to rot. 
lhoauee, a. d. of rottenness.  
yn veishteig loauee, s. the palmer worm. B 
lhoauid, s. m. rottenness.  
loauys, s. f. rottenness. 
lhon, s. m. a blackbird; pl. -yn. 
lhong, s. f. a ship; pl. -yn.  
lhuingey, a. d. of ship or ships, naval; Rev. 
xviii. 17: As ren dy chooilley vainshter, as 
sheshaght lhuingey, as shiolteyryn, as ooilley 
ny va dellal er yn aarkey, shassoo foddey jeh. 
And every shipmaster, and all the company in 
ships, and sailors, and as many as trade by 
sea, stood afar off.  
lhong-chaggee, s. f. a man of war.  
lhong-spooillee, s. f. a pirate [sc. ship].  
lhong-vree, s. f. a steam-vessel.  
lout-eaghtyrlhong, s. f. a ship’s deck. 
lhuingys, s. f. shipping.  
Lhuingys Chaggee Reeoil Hostyn, s. the 
Royal Navy of Great Britain. 
goaill-lhuingys, v. embarking; s. 
embarkation. 
215 
L 
 
lhongey, s. m. a meal; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
lhongee, a. d. of a meal or meals. 
traa-longee, s. f. meal-time. 
lhoo, s. m. a shaft or thill; pl. -ghyn. 
lhoob, s. m. a loop; pl. -yn.  
lhoob-yiarn, s. m. a link. 
lhoob, v. bend, bow; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83;-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
lhoobey, v. bending.  
lhoobit, 85. bent, made crooked.  
lhoobey, s. m. a bend, a bow; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn]. 
lhoobeyder, s. m. a bender; pl. -yn.  
lhott, s. m. a wound; pl. -yn. 
lhott, v. wound; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
lhottey, v. wounding, hurting so as to cause 
a wound.  
lhottit, 85. wounded.  
lhotteyder, s. m. one that wounds.  
lhoys 
cha lhoys, v. dare not. <S>  
loys dhyt, p. darest thou.  
b’loys, v. durst, darest.  
by-loys, <ad>v. 167. durst or darest. See 
b’loys.  
my v[’]loys, v. if darest or durst. B 
lhuan, s. f. any weak thing that comes out of 
due time, such as a lamb, calf, swarm of 
bees, &c.; pl. -yn.  
looan, s. See lhuan.  
Lhuanys or Lhunys, s. m. Lammas. 
lhuddyr, v. maul, mangle, hack and dirty 
withal; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
dy lhuddyraghey or lhuddyral, v. to maul, 
mangle, &c. in an unskilful manner.  
lhuddyrit, 85. mangled, dirtied, draggled 
in dirt.  
lhuddyrey, s. m. a mangler, &c.; pl. 69 
[change -ey to -yn].  
lhun or lhunn*, v. launch; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
The but[t] end of an oar is called lhun, 
because used to draw or launch a boat on.  
lhunney, v. launching.  
dy lhunnaghey, v. to launch.  
lhun<y>[n]it, 85. launched. 
lunn, s. See lhunn.  
lhunneyder, s. m. one who launches; pl. 
-yn.  
lhune, s. m. ale, strong drink.  
lhionney, a. d. of ale or beer. 
thie lhionney, s. m. an ale house. 
lhuss, s. leeks, lentils, herbs.  
lus. See lhuss, an herb, leek.  
lus-blaystal, s. f. savory.  
lus feie y tooill, s. f. wild clary.  
lus-lheihys, s. f. Solomon’s seal or heal; a 
species of bell-wort.  
lus-luna, s. f. moonwort.  
lus millish ny lheeanagh, s. f. meadow 
sweet.  
lus-skeilley, s. f. loosestrife, or willow-
wort.  
lus-thie, s. f. sengreen, houseleek.  
lus ny binjey, s. f. dropwort.  
lus ny binjey lheeanagh, s. f. meadow 
trefoil.  
lus ny binjey mooar, s. f. crudwort.  
lus ny chroshey, s. f. cudwort, cotton 
weed, chaffweed, or dwarf cotton.  
lus ny fahnnaghyn, s. f. wartwort, spurge.  
lus ny freenaghyn mooarey, s. f. dove’s 
foot, crane’s bill.  
lus ny geayee, s. f. ane[m]o[n]e.  
lus ny minnag, s. f. dandelion, piss-a-bed.  
lus ny moal moirrey, s. f. common 
mallows.  
lus ny moyl moirrey, s. f. marsh mallows.  
lus y çhengey veg, s. f. mouse-ear.  
lus y çhiolg, s. f. golden maiden hair.  
lus y chollane, s. f. the herb robin run over 
the hedge.  
lus y chorran, s. f. sickle weed.  
lus y cramman doo, s. f. knapweed or 
button wort.  
lus y daa phing, s. f. money-wart, the herb 
twopence.  
lus y druight, s. f. sun-dew.  
lus y ghew, s. f. purging flax.  
lus y ghoot, s. f. gerrard, goutwort.  
lus y lheaney, s. f. bindweed, convolvulus.  
lus y ryptar, s. f. allseed, rupture wort, 
little flax.  
216 
L 
 
lus y tooill, s. f. clary or clear eye, eye 
bright.  
lus y volley, s. f. lady’s bed-straw.  
lus y vooin or clioagagh gliwnagh, s. f. 
gladwin or stinking gladwin.  
lus y wee or wuigh, s. f. woald or wold, 
dyer’s weed, for dying yellow.  
lus y yiarey, s. f. flux weed.  
lus yn aile, s. f. burnet.  
oayl[-]luss, s. f. the science of botany. 
slaan-luss, s. f. ribwort. 
slane-luss or slan-luss. See also slaanluss, 
ribwort, called so in Manks on account of 
its quality in assisting nature to heal, when 
applied. 
liack, a. like, equal. See also liak [deest]. 
laik, adv. like. 
co[-]liack, adv. alike, equal. See also 
coliak.  
co[-]liak, adv. alike, of the same likeness. 
liack, v. approving of, liking; -agh, 77; -in, 
83; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
laik, v. to choose, to approve.  
s’liack, v. do or doth like. L 
by-liack or by-laik, adv. See also bliack, 
167. did or didst like; Gen. xlviii. 17: As tra 
honnick Joseph, dy dug e ayr e laue yesh er 
kione Ephraim, cha by-laik lesh eh. And when 
Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand 
upon the head of Ephraim, it displeased him.  
b[’]liack, v. did or didst like.  
liackal, v. liking.  
liackit, 85. liked.  
liaee, v. (from liack), liking; as, cha vel 
liaee aym er (I have no liking for it).  
liass, s. (from liehys or leighys), law-step, or a 
step by law or marriage.  
liass huyr, s. f. a step sister.  
liass inneen, s. f. a step daughter.  
liass vac, s. m. a step son.  
liass voir or liass ummug, s. f. a step 
mother.  
liass vraar, s. m. a step brother.  
liass yishig or liass-ayr, s. m. a step father. 
The latter of these is seldom used.  
liauyr, a. long, prolix, lengthy.  
s’liauyr, a. how long. L 
s’lhiurey, a. longer, longest, the comp. and 
sup. of liauyr. L 
liauyrey, a. pl. long, lengthy.  
cleaysh-liauyr, s. f. a long ear, slow in 
answering, forbearing. 
co[-]liauyr, adv. as long, equal in length. 
lhiuree, v. lengthen, make long.  
lhiuragh or lhiuraghey, v. lengthening.  
lhiurid, s. m. length, procerity; pl. -yn. 
er-lhiurid, adv. at length, at full length, 
along on the ground. 
lickly, adv. likely, probable, but not 
altogether certain, more for than against.  
s’lickly, a. how likely, comp. and sup. L 
lieckan, s. f. (from lieh kione), cheek; 1 
Kings, xxii. 24: Agh hie Zedekiah mac 
Chenaanah er-gerrey, as woaill eh Micaiah er y 
lieckan, as dooyrt eh, Cre’n raad ghow Spyrryd 
y Chiarn voym’s dy loayrt rhyt’s? But Zedekiah 
the son of Chenaanah went near, and smote 
Micaiah on the cheek, and said, Which way 
went the Spirit of the Lord from me to speak 
unto thee?; Job, xvi. 10: T’ad er vlaakey 
orrym lesh nyn meeal: t’ad er my woalley er y 
lieckan dy naareydagh; t’ad er haglym ad-hene 
cooidjagh m’oï. They have gaped upon me with 
their mouth; they have smitten me upon the 
cheek reproachfully; they have gathered 
themselves together against me; and Luke, vi. 
29: As huggeysyn woaillys oo er y derrey 
lieckan, chyndaa myrgeddin yn lieckan elley: 
as eshyn ghoys ersooyl dty chloagey, ny bee 
noi dty chooat y lhiggey lesh myrgeddin. And 
unto him that smiteth thee on the one cheek 
offer also the other; and him that taketh away 
thy cloak forbid not to take thy coat also; what 
is seen in a profile view of the head; pl. 
-yn.  
lieckanagh, a. d. of the cheek or cheeks; 
caslys lieckanagh would be a profile 
likeness.  
lieen, s. m. lint, flax, linen; pl. -teeyn or 
-teenyn. The pl. is used for nets, perhaps 
because they are made of flax; Eccl. vii. 26: 
As hooar mee ny shirroo na’n baase yn ven 
ta’n cree eck ribbaghyn as lieenteenyn, as e 
laueyn myr geulaghyn: quoi-erbee ta dy wooiys 
Jee shaghnys ee, agh bee’n drogh yantagh goit 
lioree. And I find more bitter than death the 
woman, whose heart is snares and nets, and 
her hands as bands: whoso pleaseth God shall 
217 
L 
 
escape from her; but the sinner shall be taken 
by her; and Mark, i. 18: As chelleeragh hreig 
ad nyn lieenteenyn, as deiyr ad er. And 
straightway they forsook their nets, and 
followed him.  
mwyllin lieen, s. f. a flax mill. 
lieh, s. m. half, moiety; pl. -ghyn.  
yn derrey-l[ie]h, s. m. the one half. 
liegh, a. half gone, half done, mid way.  
lieh-charkyl, s. m. a semicircle.  
lieh-chiart, a. uneven, odd, rough.  
 lieh-chiartys, s. m. unevenness.  
lieh-chraue, s. f. a gristle.  
lieh-hoost, s. m. threshing with one flail.  
lieh-kiart, s. m. the even half.  
lieh-hooillagh, a. monocular, one eyed.  
liegh-lhieent, a. half-flood or flowed.  
lieh my lieh, adv. half each, half apiece.  
lieh-scoadey or lieh-skew, a. slopewise, 
obliquely. 
cur-ny-lieh, v. impeaching, accusing. 
er-y-lieh, adv. on the half, by the half. 
fer loayrt as lheh, s. m. an intercessor. 
my-lieh, adv. my behalf; Deu. xxxi. 19: 
Shen-y-fa nish, scrieu-jee yn arrane moyllee 
shoh diu hene, as ynsee-jee eh da cloan Israel: 
dy vod eh ve oc dy ghoaill, as dy vod yn arrane 
shoh ve son feanish my-lieh noi cloan Israel. 
Now therefore write ye this song for you, and 
teach it the children of Israel: put it in their 
mouths, that this song may be a witness for me 
against the children of Israel.  
liehid or liehd, s. f. half a breadth.  
liehbage, s. f. a flook, a flat fish; pl. -yn. 
liehneen, s. m. the lining of a hedge, &c.  
liggar, s. m. liquor, spirits; pl. -yn. 
liggin, s. m. slack water, eddy water, dead 
water, where or when there is no tide or 
stream; pl. -yn. 
limmer, s. the passage for water under the 
floorings of a boat or vessel. 
lindeyr, s. f. a lintel; pl. -yn.  
lioar, s. f. a book; pl. -yn. This word is used 
as an oath, and it may seem strange that it 
is so used in our excellent translation of the 
Scriptures; Isa. xl. 24: Dy jarroo, cha bee ad 
er nyn soiaghey; lioar, cha bee ad er nyn guirr. 
Yea, they shall not be planted; yea, they shall 
not be sown; and Mal. ii. 2: …ver-ym eer 
mollaght erriu, as ver-ym mollaght er ny 
bannaghtyn eu; lioar, ta mee hannah er chur 
mollaght orroo, er-yn-oyr nagh vel shiu goaill eh 
gys nyn gree. …I will even send a curse upon 
you, and I will curse your blessings: yea, I have 
cursed them already, because ye do not lay it 
to heart, for yes or yea.  
Cleragh-ny-Lioaryn, s. m. the Clerk of the 
Rolls. 
lioaragh, a. d. of book or books; as, ynsagh 
lioaragh (book learning).  
ynsagh-lioaragh, s. m. book learning, the 
use of letters, in contradistinction to the 
learning of any thing else. 
lioaran, s. f. a small book, a pamphlet.  
lioar-hasht, s. f. a library; pl. -yn. 
lioarlhan, s. f. (lieh-arlane), half a firlot, a 
quarter of a boll.  
liooar 
dy liooar, adv. enough.  
s[’]lioar or s[’]liooar, adv. hardly enough, 
enough, what sufficeth; John, xiv. 8: Dooyrt 
Philip rish, Hiarn, jeeagh dooin yn Ayr, as 
s’lioar dooin eh. Philip saith unto him, Lord, 
shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us.  
by-lioar or by[-]liooar, adv. 1[67], would 
be enough. See also blioar.  
b[’]lioar, v. it would, &c. be enough.  
liorish, pre. and adv. by; p. p. by him, by the, 
beside; 2 Kings, xi. 20: As ghow ooilley 
pobble ny cheerey boggey, as va’n ard-valley 
ayns shee: as va Athaliah er ny varroo lesh y 
chliwe liorish thie’n ree. And all the people of 
the land rejoiced, and the city was in quiet: and 
they slew Athaliah with the sword beside the 
king’s house; -in, id. em.  
liorish[-]hene, p. p. by himself.  
lioree, p. p. by her; -ish, id. em.  
lioree[-]hene, p. p. by herself.  
lioroo, p. p. by them; -syn, id. em.  
lioroo[-]hene, p. p. by themselves.  
liorym, p. p. by me; -s, id. em.  
liorym pene, p. p. by myself.  
liorin, p. p. by us; -yn, id. em.  
liort, p. p. by thee; -s, id. em.  
liort[-]hene, p. p. by thyself.  
lieriu, p. p. by you or ye; -ish, id. em. 
218 
L 
 
list, s. f. a lean to one side. 
list, v. -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
listal, v. leaning.  
listit, 85. leaned. 
litçher, s. m. a lazy person, a sluggard, an 
idler; pl. -yn.  
litçheragh, a. lazy, slothful, idle, indolent, 
sluggish. “Litçheragh goll dy lhie, 
litçheragh dy irree, as litçheragh dy gholl 
dys y cheeill Jedoonee.” [Lazy going to bed 
(lie), lazy rising, and lazy to go to church 
on Sunday.] 
s’litçheragh, a. how lazy. L 
s’litçheree, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. L 
litçheraght, s. f. laziness, idleness, 
indolence, slothfulness; pl. -yn.  
livrey, v. deliver; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
livreit, 85. delivered.  
s’livreït, a. how delivered. L 
livreyee 
fer livreyee, s. m. a deliverer; 2 Sam. xxii. 
2: Yn Chiarn my chreg, my hoor lajer; as my 
er-livreyee. The Lord is my rock, and my 
fortress, and my deliverer.  
livreyder, s. m. a deliverer.  
livreys or livrey-ys, s. deliverance; pl. 
-syn, Jer. xxx. 7: …eer earish hrimshagh 
Yacob; agh yiow eh livrey-ys. …it is even the 
time of Jacob’s trouble, but he shall be saved 
out of it. 
loagan, v. stagger, staggering; Isa. xxix. 9: 
T’ad er-meshtey, agh cha nee lesh feeyn; t’ad 
loagan, agh cha nee lesh jough lajer. They are 
drunken, but not with wine; they stagger, but 
not with strong drink.  
loaganagh, s. m. one that staggers; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
loaganys, s. staggering. 
loaght, v. handle, feel; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
loaghtey, v. handling, feeling with hands.  
loaghtee, a. d. of handling.  
loaghtit, 85. handled, felt with the hand.  
s’loaghtit, a. how handled or felt with 
hands. L 
loaghteyder, s. m. a handler; pl. -yn. 
loaghtrane, s. See loaghrane. 
loaghrane, s. f. the handle of a flail. See 
cass.  
loaghtyn or lugh-dhoan, a. brown; Gen. xxx. 
33 and 35: …dy chooilley unnane nagh vel 
breck as spottagh mastey ny goair, as 
loaghtyn mastey ny kirree, lhig da shen ve 
coontit myr griu vaarlee. …every one that is not 
speckled and spotted among the goats, and 
brown among the sheep, that shall be counted 
stolen with me. As scarr eh yn laa shen ny 
goair fyrryn va schimmeigagh as spottagh, as 
ooilley ny goair woirryn va breck as spottagh, 
as dy chooilley unnane va red ennagh dy 
vâneyd ayn, as ooilley ny va loaghtyn mastey 
ny kirree, as hug eh ad fo laueyn e vec. And he 
removed that day the he goats that were 
ringstraked and spotted, and all the she goats 
that were speckled and spotted, and every one 
that had some white in it, and all the brown 
among the sheep, and gave them into the hand 
of his sons.There is no word in English by 
which to express loaghtyn or keeir. Lugh 
dhoan is very descriptive of the colour —
lugh (mouse), and dhoan (brown). These 
colours mixed will produce the shade 
which is understood by loaghtyn, or the 
word may be from lhosht dhoan (burnt 
brown).  
s’loaghtyn, a. how dun and brown. L 
loam, a. shorn, bare. See also lhoam. Both are 
used. Prov. “Cronk ghlass foddey voym, 
Loam loam tra roshym eh” [A green hill far 
from me, Bare, bare, when I reach it]; and 
another, “Yn loam leigh yn loam chair;” 
though some will have it to be, yn loam 
aggair. [The bare law, the bare right (or 
wrong).] 
s’loam, a. how bare or shorn. Prov. 
“S’loam ta laare y valley vargee.” [Bare is 
the ground of the market town.] L 
s’loamey, a. id., comp. and sup. L 
loamey, a. pl. bare.  
loam-choshagh, a. bare-footed.  
lhome-lauee, a. empty-handed.  
loam-liastey, a. very reluctant or loath.  
lhoamid, s. m. bareness.  
loam, v. bare; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88,  
lhoam or lhome, v. bare; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
219 
L 
 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
lomm, v. make bare; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
lhoamey, v. making bare.  
lommey, v. making bare.  
lhoamee, a. d. of making bare.  
lommee, a. d. of baring.  
lhoamit, 85. bared, made bare.  
loamit, 85. made bare, bared.  
s’loamit, a. how bared. L 
lommit, 85. bared, made bare.  
lhoameyder, s. m. one that makes bare.  
lommeyder, s. m. one that makes bare.  
lomman, s. m. a scorching wind that dries 
up and makes the ground bare of herbage; 
Hos. xiii. 15: Ga dy vel eh messoil mastey e 
vraaraghyn, hig geay-niar er, hig lomman lajer 
veih’n Chiarn seose ass yn aasagh, as 
chyrmee eh seose ny farraneyn geill echey, as 
hed ny strooanyn ushtey echey naardey. 
Though he be fruitful among his brethren, an 
east wind shall come, the wind of the Lord shall 
come up from the wilderness, and his spring 
shall become dry, and his fountain shall be 
dried up.  
lommanagh, a. scorching, baring. 
loamrey, s. f. a fleece; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
lomrey, s. See loamrey.  
loamr, v. fleece, shear off; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88.  
lommyrt, v. shearing sheep, making bare 
by cutting off the wool or hair.  
loamrit, 85. fleeced, shorn.  
lomrit, 85. shorn bare of wool or hair.  
s’loam[r]yt, a. how shorn or fleeced. L 
neu-lomrit, a. unshorn, unfleeced. 
loamreyder, s. m. one that shears the fleece 
off. 
lhommyrt, s. m. the shearing of sheep. 
lommyrtagh, s. m. a shearer of sheep; pl. 
71 [change -agh to -ee]. 
lommyrtagh, a. anything made bare, as a 
sword, &c., unsheathed.  
lhommyrtagh, a. bare of cover; drawn; as, 
cliwe lhommyrtagh (a drawn sword).  
loayr, v. speak, spoke; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
loayrt, v. speaking.  
loayrit, 85. spoken.  
s’loayrit, a. how much spoken. L  
fer loayrt as lheh, s. m. an intercessor. 
fer loayrt er nyn son, s. m. one speaking 
for us. 
loayreyder or loayrtagh, s. m. a speaker.  
loayrtys, s. m. utterance to speak, or of 
speech. 
co[-]loayrt, v. conversing; -agh, 77, &c.  
co[-]loayrtagh, s. m. converser; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
co[-]loayrtys, s. m. conversation; pl. -yn. 
loggyr, s. f. something got or allowed above 
expectation, or for luck. 
logh, s. f. a lake, a pool; pl. -yn.  
loghan, s. f. a small lake; pl. -yn; the dim. 
of logh.  
loghanagh 
s’loghanagh, a. how full of lakes. L 
s’loghanee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. L 
loght, s. m. crime, offence, trespass, guilt, 
transgression, sin; pl. -yn.  
ard-loght, s. m. felony, capital offence; pl. 
-yn.  
gyn-loght, adv. without crime or guilt, 
innocent.  
loghtynid, s. m. criminality, guiltiness. 
neu-loghtynid, s. m. innocence, not guilty. 
loghtal, a. severe, violent, stern; deep as a 
cut, &c.; strong as a gale of wind.  
s’loghtal, a. how severe or heavy. L 
s’loghtaley, a. id., comp. and sup. L 
loghtalid, s. m. severity, violence. 
lomarcan, a. alone, deprived of company. 
londeyr, s. f. a lantern; pl. -yn.  
londeyragh, a. d. of a lantern.  
londernee or londyrnee, v. glaring, 
dazzling with lustre; Nah. ii. 4: Nee ny 
fainee freaney ayns ny straïdyn, nee ad roie 
noi-ry-hoi ayns ny raaidyn lheaney, nee ad 
loandernee myr lossey aile, nee ad roie myr ny 
tendreilyn. The chariots shall rage in the 
streets, they shall justle one against another in 
the broad ways: they shall seem like torches, 
they shall run like the lightnings. 
loo, s. m. an oath; pl. -ghyn. 
looee, a. d. of an oath or oaths.  
220 
L 
 
loo-oaiagh (a false oath) 
loo, v. swear; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
looit, 85 sworn.  
s’looit, a. how sworn. L 
loor, a. lusty, stout; Gen. xlix. 14: Ta Issachar 
ny assyl loor, croymmey eddyr daa errey. 
Issachar is a strong ass couching down 
between two burdens.  
loorid, s. m. lustiness.  
lorg, s. m. a staff.  
luirg, s. pl. staves; the pl. of lorg.  
lorg-howshan, s. f. a measuring rule.  
lorg-immanagh, s. f. a goad; 
<Ecclesiasticus, xii. 11> [The only Biblical 
example of lorg-immanagh seems to be this 
one: Judges, iii. 31: As ny lurg-syn hrog 
Shamgar, mac Anath, varr jeh ny Philistinee 
shey cheea[d] dooinney lesh lorg-immanagh: 
as ren eshyn myrgeddin livrey Israel. And after 
him was Shamgar the son of Anath, which slew 
of the Philistines six hundred men with an ox 
goad: and he also delivered Israel.]  
lorg-reeoil or lorg-reill, s. f. a sceptre.  
lorg* or lorgee, v. drive or urge forward 
with a staff; -agh 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
dy lorgaghey, v. to excite or drive forward.  
lorgit, 85. excited, urged. 
losgan, s. f. a lamp; pl. -yn. 
losht, s. f. a bake stone, or baking board. 
losht, v. burn; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms. 87; -ys. 88.  
lostey, v. burning; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
lostey-c<h>ainley, s. m. the churching of 
women. Called so, perhaps, from the 
practice of burning a candle during the 
service in former times.  
loshtee, a. d. of burning.  
losht or loshtit, 85. burnt, burned.  
s’losht, a. how burned. L 
cr[e]ayn-losht, s. m. burning ague; Lev. 
xxvi. 16: Shoh myrgeddin neem’s y yannoo 
riuish, ver-yms lhiam erriu atchim, 
consumption, as crayn-losht, ver naardey’n 
soilshey, as cur sneih er y chree. I also will do 
this unto you; I will even appoint over you 
terror, consumption, and the burning ague, that 
shall consume the eyes, and cause sorrow of 
heart. 
losteyder, s. m. one who puts things to 
burn.  
loshagh 
neu-loshagh, a. incombustible. 
loshtagh 
s’loshtagh, a. with what burning smart. L 
s’loshtee, a. id., 58. L 
loss, v. blaze, flame; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
lossey, v. flaming, burning in a blaze; s. m. 
a flame; Luke, xvi. 24: Ayr Abraham, jean 
myghin orrym, as cur Lazarus, dy vod eh baare 
e vair y hummey ayns ushtey, as my hengey y 
eayraghey; son ta mee er my horchaghey ayns 
y lossey shoh. Father Abraham, have mercy 
on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the 
tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue; 
for I am tormented in this flame.  
lossaghyn, s. pl. burnings, flamings.  
lossee, a. d. of flame or flaming, blazing.  
lossag, s. f. a small flame or flash.  
lossan, s. f. luminous particles seen in the 
sea by night, and on fish that are not dry, in 
the dark; the aurora borealis or northern 
lights.  
lossanagh, a. having luminous qualities, or 
aurora borealis.  
s’lossanagh, a. how luminous. L 
s’lossanee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. L 
losserey, s. f. an herb; pl. 72 [change -ey to 
-eeyn] [pl. lossreeyn in the Bible].  
losseree, s. f. herbage, herbs. 
ard-losserey, s. m. ground-ivy, alehoof.  
ard-losserey-firryn, the herb archangel. 
lott, s. f. a lot. 
lott, v. to allot; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
lourane, s. m. a leper; pl. -e.  
louraanagh, a. leprous.  
s’louraanagh, a. how leprous. L 
s’louraanee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. L 
louraanys, loihrey, or lourey, s. f. leprosy. 
lout, s. m. a loft; pl. -yn. 
lout-eaghtyr, s. f. a deck.  
lout-eaghtyr[-]lhong, s. f. a ship’s deck.  
lout, v. loft; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
221 
L 
 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
anlout, v. unloft; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -ey, 82; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. 
loutey, v. a lofting.  
loutit, 85. lofted.  
s’loutit, a. how lofted. L 
louteyder, s. m. one who lofts. 
louyn 
er-louyn, adv. on a rope, by the hand, 
along. 
louyr, s. f. an abort or abortion; a slink or 
castling which has been some time dead 
before brought forth, so that it is partly 
rotten and stinking.  
louyran, s. f. a small castling. Prov. 
“Lhiannoo ny louyran.” [A child or a 
castling.] 
low, v. allow; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
lowit, 85. allowed.  
s’lowit, a. how allowed. L 
neu-lowit, a. disallowed. 
meelow, v. disallow; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
lowal, a. lawful, allowable; Luke, xiv. 3: As 
dreggyr Yeesey, as loayr eh rish fir-ynsee yn 
leigh as rish ny Phariseeyn, gra, Vel eh lowal 
dy lheihys er laa yn doonaght? And Jesus 
answering spake unto the lawyers and 
Pharisees, saying, Is it lawful to heal on the 
sabbath day?  
s’lowal, a. how much approved or allowed 
of. L 
s’lowaley, a. id., comp. and sup. L 
neu-lowal, a. disallowable, unfit immoral, 
immodest, illtimed. 
lowaltys, s. m. approbation.  
lowanse, s. m. a thing allowed; Jer. xxxvii. 
21: Eisht doardee Zedekiah yn ree Jeremiah 
dy ve ayns cooyrt y phryssoon, as dy choyrt da 
gagh-laa lowanse arran veih straid y 
fuinneyder, derrey veagh ooilley’n arran ’syn 
ard-valley baarit. Then Zedekiah the king 
commanded that they should commit Jeremiah 
into the court of the prison, and that they should 
give him daily a piece of bread out of the 
bakers’ street, until all the bread in the city were 
spent.  
loweyder, s. m. an allower; pl. -yn. 
lubban breck, s. f. a sea nettle. 
lubberlab, s. f. the herb bogbane. 
luddan-mea, s. f. a luminous oily spot on the 
surface of water; Job xli. 32: T’eh cur er 
luddan-mea dy hoilshean ny yeï; heillagh fer 
yn diunid dy ve lheeah. He maketh a path to 
shine after him; one would think the deep to be 
hoary.  
luff, v. loof [i.e. luff], bear close to the 
windward; -agh, 77; -al, 79; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
lugg, s. f. a sea or sand worm used for bait.  
lugh, s. f. a mouse, a mole; pl. -ee; Isa. ii. 20: 
Nee dooinney ayns y laa shen ceau gys ny 
lughee as ny craitnagyn, e yallooyn argid as e 
yallooyn airhey, ren ad, dagh dooinney da 
hene, dy ooashlaghey. In that day a man shall 
cast his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, 
which they made each one for himself to 
worship, to the moles and to the bats.  
loagh, s. See lugh.  
lughagh, a. d. of a mouse or mice.  
lught, s. m. load, cargo, burden; what any 
thing can hold; pl. -yn. 
lught-thie, s. m. a household, a family.  
lught, v. -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
lughtagh or lughtaghey, v. taking in a 
cargo or load.  
lughtit, 85. loaded, loaden.  
neu-lughtit, unladen, unloaded. 
anlught, v. unload. 
anlughtit. 85. unladen. 
lughteyder, s. m. one that loads; pl. -yn.  
lune, v. slander; -agh, 77; -e, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
luney, v. slandering; 2 Sam. xix. 27: As t’eh 
er luney dty harvaant gys my hiarn y ree. And 
he hath slandered thy servant unto my lord the 
king.  
lunit, 85. slandered.  
lunagh, a. rude, sarcastic, contemptuous, 
slanderous; s. m. a rude person; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]; slanderers; Mark, xv. 
[29]: As loayr yn vooinjer va goll shaghey dy 
222 
L 
 
lunagh n’oi, craa nyn ghing, as gra, Ah, uss ta 
lhieggal y chiamble, as dy hroggal eh reesht 
ayns three laa. And they that passed by railed 
on him, wagging their heads, and saying, Ah, 
thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it 
in three days.  
lung-lane, a. quite full; Ez. xxviii. 16: Liorish 
ymmodee dty varchantys, t’ad er dty lhieeney 
lung-lane dy hranlaase, as t’ou er n’yannoo 
peccah. By the multitude of thy merchandise 
they have filled the midst of thee with violence, 
and thou hast sinned. 
Lunnin, s. m. London.  
lurg, pre. after, after him or it; -syn, id. em.  
lurg-ooilley, adv. after all.  
lurg y thooilley, a. postdiluvian.  
lurgey, s. f. a leg; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
lurgagh, a. d. of the leg or legs. 
camlurgagh, a. bow legged. 
lurgeydish, s. f. the herb penny-royal.  
lutçh, v. to carry in a clumsy slovenly 
manner; -agh, 77, &c.  
lutçhey, v. lubbering.  
dy lutçhagh, adv. loobily.  
lutçhynagh, s. m. a looby, a lubber, an 
awkward clumsy fellow; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee]. 
223 
M 
 
M 
This letter is an initial in words primarily 
initialled by b, by placing the pronoun nyn 
before them, as shown in Remark 41; for its 
own changes see 52.  
 Note. —It may be well here to observe 
that a train of substantives and verbs 
radically in b, by placing nyn before them, 
might be here inserted, but for brevity’s sake 
are omitted, except a few, as reference may be 
made to the radicals in b, and change the b to 
m, the meaning being the same.  
 
maaig, s. f. a paw, a claw; pl. -yn. 
yn vaaig, s. the paw or claw. M 
maaigagh, a. unhandy, clumsy with the 
hand. 
s’maaigagh, a. how awkward in handling. 
M 
s’maaigee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. M 
feer vaaigagh, a. very unhandy. M 
maaigerey, s. m. a person handling 
awkwardly. 
maarderagh, s. m. a fornicator; a whore-
monger; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]: [1 
Cor. v. 11: Ny-yeih cha nee ooilley-cooidjagh 
rish maarderee yn theihll shoh, ny rish ny 
sayntoilee, ny ny tranlaasee, ny roosyn ta cur 
ooashley da jallooyn. Yet not altogether with 
the fornicators of this world, or with the 
covetous, or extortioners, or with idolaters.] 
yn vaarderagh, s. the fornicator; <1 Cor. v. 
11>. 
maarderys, s. f. fornication, whoredom, 
adultery; Mat. v. 3[2]: Quoi-erbee scarrys 
rish e ven, agh son oyr maarderys, dy vel eh 
cur urree poosey y vrishey: as quoi-erbee 
phoosys ish ta scart, t’eh ny vaarderagh. 
Whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for 
the cause of fornication, causeth her to commit 
adultery: and whosoever shall marry her that is 
divorced committeth adultery. 
dy vaarderys, s. of fornication or 
whoredom. M 
maarliagh, s. m. a thief, one that steals. 
yn vaarliagh, s. the thief; pl. 71 [change 
-[i]agh to -ee]. M 
maarlee, s. pl. thieves, marauders. 
dy vaarlee, s. of thieves. M 
maarlys or maarleeys, s. theft; Mark, vii. 
[21-]22: Son veih cheu-sthie, magh veih 
creeaghyn deiney, ta cheet 
drogh-smooinaghtyn, brishey-poosey, 
maarderys, dunverys, Maarlys, saynt, olkys, 
molteyrys, rouanys, drogh-hooill, goan 
mollaghtagh, moyrn, ommijys. For from within, 
out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts, 
adulteries, fornications, murders, Thefts, 
covetousness, wickedness, deceit, 
lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, 
foolishness.  
dy vaarleeys or vaarlys, s. of theft. M 
maase, s. m. cattle, kine. 
e vaase or vaanse, s. his cattle or kine. M 
maaish 
See Exod. xiii. 12, where the word is in its 
radical state: Dy der oo er-lheh da’n Chiarn 
ooilley yn chied ruggit, as jeh dty chied ingan 
maaish, bee ny fyrrynee lesh y Chiarn. That 
thou shalt set apart unto the Lord all that 
openeth the matrix, and every firstling that 
cometh of a beast which thou hast; the males 
shall be the Lord’s. M 
e vaaish, s. [of] his cattle. 
mabbyl, s. m. maple. 
mac, s. m. son, fitz. 
mec, s. pl. sons; the pl. of mac. 
dty vac, s. thy son; -s, id. em. M 
e vec, s. his sons. M 
mac[-]imshee, s. m. the son of discord or 
false peace.  
mac[-]kewyl, s. m. a kelson or keelson. 
mac[-]mollaght, s. m. son of a curse, son 
of perdition, the devil. 
mac-soyley, s. m. an instance, a metaphor 
to illustrate by. 
liass vac, s. m. a step son. 
maccan, s. m. a little son; Laa’l maccan; 
(Innocent’s day), kept by the Church in 
Christmas. It may be from a little son, or 
from m’accan (my moan). 
madyr, s. 
dy vadyr, s. of matter; pl. -yn. M 
madyr, v. matter, import; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
madyral, v. regarding. 
224 
M 
 
madyran or madran, s. m. the morning 
dawn, the twilight; pl. -yn. 
yn vadran or vadyran, s. the dawn; Matt. 
xxviii. 1: Tra va’n doonaght harrish, as y 
vadran cheet rish er y chied laa jeh’n chiaghtin, 
haink Moirrey Malaine, as Moirrey elley dy 
voddagh ad yn oaie y akin. In the end of the 
sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first 
day of the week, came Mary Magdalene and 
the other Mary to see the sepulchre; the 
morning; Isaiah, xiv. 12: Kys t’ou er duittym 
veih niau, O Lucifer, mac y vadran! How art 
thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the 
morning! M 
mag, s. m. a failure in a rope. 
maggane, s. m. numbness. 
e vaggane, s. his numbness. M 
magganagh, a. numb, clumsy, not acute in 
feeling. 
s’maganeagh, a. how numb. M 
s’maganee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. M 
feer vagganagh, a. very numb. M 
magganys, s. torpor, numbness. 
dty vagganeys, s. thy numbness. M 
maggle, s. m. a testicle; pl. -yn. 
e vaggle, s. his testicle; pl. -yn. M 
magh, adv. out, forth; opposed to stiagh. 
magh-voish, pre. except, without, 
exclusive. 
feddyn magh, v. finding out, discovering. 
fockley-magh, v. proclaiming, 
promulgating. 
irree-magh, s. a rebellion, pl. -yn. 
trooid-magh, pre. throughout, quite 
through. 
tuittym-magh, v. falling out, quarrelling. 
maghey, adv. forth, from hence forth, 
hence forward; Isa. xli. 22: Lhig daue 
soiaghey magh nyn yallooyn, as faishnagh 
dooin cre vees maghey shoh: Let them bring 
them forth, and shew us what shall happen. 
magher, s. m. a field; pl. -yn. 
yn vagher, s. the field; pl. -yn. M 
magher banjee (a lea field) 
magheragh, a. d. of the field; Cant. i[ii]. 5: 
Ta mee cur currym erriu, O shiuish inneenyn 
Yerusalem, liorish y taitnys t’eu ayns shelg ny 
feeaïhee sleitagh as magheragh, nagh brish 
shiu e chadley, as nagh jean shiu doostey my 
ghraih, derrey saillish hene. I charge you, O ye 
daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes, and by 
the hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, nor 
awake my love, till he please. 
y vagheragh. a. d. of the field or fields. M 
maidjey, s. m. a stick or pole; pl. 69 [change 
-ey to -yn]; a. anything made of timber in 
opposition to other stuff; as, claare maidjey 
(a wooden dish). 
dty vaidjey, s. thy stick; pl. 69. M 
maidjagh, a. d. of sticks or timber. 
maidjey laue, s. m. a walking stick. 
maidjey mastee, s. m. a mixing stick. 
maidjey raue, s. m. an oar; pl. 69 [i.e. 
maidjyn raue]. 
maihaghey, v. pardoning; Micah, vii. 18: 
Quoi ta ny Yee casley rhyt’s, ta leih mee-
chairys, as maih’ghey yn shaghrynys ocsyn ta 
er-mayrn ayns e eiraght? Who is a God like 
unto thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth 
by the transgression of the remnant of his 
heritage? 
maiht, 85. pardoned; Hymn 160. 
Eisht tra ta’n obbyr niartal jeant, 
As slane nyn beccah maiht. 
Gow shin gys niau as cur dooin ayrn, 
Marish dty vooinjer reiht. 
[Then when the mighty work is done, 
And our sin completely pardoned. 
Take us to heaven and give us part, 
With Thy chosen people. MWW]  
Mail, s. m. Michael. 
mainstyr, s. m. master; pl. -yn.  
yn vainshter or vainshtyr, s. the master; 
pl. -yn. M  
ben-ainshtyr, s. f. a mistress. 
mainstyraght, s. m. mastery. 
yn vainshtyraght, s. the mastery. M  
mair, s. f. a finger. 
meir, s. pl. fingers.  
e vair, s. his finger. M 
e veir, s. his fingers. M 
mair chass, s. f. a toe. 
mairagh, s. m. morrow, to-morrow; pl. -yn. 
kin mairagh, s. the end of to-morrow 
night. 
laa ny vairagh, s. the morrow or morrow 
225 
M 
 
day. M 
laa ny vair<r>agh, s. lit. the morrow day. 
mam, s. f. the hands full when placed together 
by the little fingers. 
mamm, s. f. a blain; Exod. ix. 9: As hig eh dy 
ve joan myn ayns ooilley cheer Egypt, as bee 
eh ny askaid brishey magh ayns mammyn, er 
dooinney as er baagh, fud ooilley cheer Egypt. 
And it shall become small dust in all the land of 
Egypt, and shall be a boil breaking forth with 
blains upon man, and upon beast, throughout 
all the land of Egypt; pl. -yn. 
e vam, s. his blain. M 
manjoor, s. m. a manger; pl. -yn. 
yn vanjoor, s. the manger; pl. -yn. M 
mannagh, conj. (a compound of my, if, and 
nagh, not), if not, or not, unless, except. 
The translators of the Scriptures have 
spelled this word exactly as it is sounded; 
why did they not spell my (if) ma, 
throughout? 
mannan, s. m. a kid; pl. -yn. 
un vannan, s. one kid; pl. -yn. M 
Mannin, s. f. the Isle of Man, the Island 
called Man or Mona; Mannin veg veen 
(little dear or favourite Isle of Man).  
Ellan Vannin, s. Isle of Man. M 
Manninagh, a. Manks, of or belonging to 
the Isle of Man. 
Manninagh, s. m. a native of Man or 
Mona; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]. 
dy Vanninagh, s. of a Manks person; pl. 
71. M 
Manninan Mac Lear, s. m. Neptune, son of 
the sea. 
marane, s. f. a thimble; pl. -yn. 
yn varane, s. the thimble. M 
marçhan, s. m. a merchant; pl. -yn. 
yn varçhan, s. the merchant. M 
marçhanys, s. m. merchandize. 
e varçhanys, s. his merchandize. M 
margey, s. m. a fair, mart, market. 
yn vargey, s. the fair or market; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn]. M 
margee, a. d. of a fair or market. 
vargee, a. d. of the fair or market. Cha vel 
y Vanninagh dy bragh creeney, dys y laa 
lurg y vargee. [The Manxman is never wise 
till the day after the fair.] M  
balley-mergee, s. m. a market town. 
thie mergee, s. f. a market-house. 
mergey, a. d. of a market or fair. 
marish, p. p. with, with him, besides; -yn, id. 
em.  
maree, p. p. with her; -ish, id. em. 
maroo, p. p. with them; -syn, id. em.  
marym, p. p. with me; -s, id. em.  
marin, p. p. with us; -yn, id. em. 
mayrt, p. p. with thee; -s, id. em.  
meriu, p. p. with you; -ish, id. em. 
mark 
yn vark, s. the mark. M  
markish, a. d. of mark. 
mark* or markee, v. ride; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in 88; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
vark* or varkee, v. did ride or rode; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. M 
markiaghey, v. riding. 
er varkiaghey, v. [hath, &c.] rode or 
ridden. M 
er varkagh, v. hath, &c. rode. M 
markit, 85. rode, rid[d]en. 
agh-markiagh, s. m. a riding horse. 
markiagh, s. m. a rider; pl. 71 [change 
-[i]agh to -ee].  
yn varkiagh, s. the rider; pl. 71. M 
markym-jeelym, s. m. the shaking or 
vibration of the sun shine on the ground on 
a hot sun shiny day. 
marr, v. kill, slay; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 88; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
marr-jee, v. i. kill ye, slay ye. 
varr, v. did kill, slay, or slew; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. M 
marroo, v. killing, &c.  
marroo, a. dead, slain, killed; cha marroo 
as clagh (as dead as a stone). 
s’marroo, a. how dead, how lifeless, comp. 
and sup. M 
ro varroo, a. too dead or lifeless. M  
yn varroo, s. the dead or deceased person. 
M 
merriu, pl.  
clag-merriu, s. a knell. 
shiu verriu or verroo, s. ye dead. M 
226 
M 
 
merriuid, s. m. deadness. 
e verriuid or verrooid, s. his deadness. M 
marreyder or marrooder, s. m. a killer, a 
slayer, an avenger.  
yn varrooder, s. the killer or slayer. M  
marragh 
ard-marragh, s. m. an admiral; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. 
marran, s. mistake, error, wrong; Psl. lvi. 
[5]: T’ad gagh-laa goaill my ghoan marran: 
ooilley ny t’ad smooinaghtyn er te dy yannoo 
olk dou. They daily mistake my words: all that 
they imagine is to do me evil.  
yn varran, s. the error or mistake. M 
marranagh, s. m. one in error; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. 
feer varranagh, a. very erroneous, &c. M 
marranys, s. m. mistake, error; Job, xix. 4: 
As abbyr dy vel mee fo marranys, ta my 
varranys lhie orrym pene. And be it indeed that 
I have erred, mine error remaineth with myself.  
marre-vaaish, s. a pall, or covering used in 
olden times before the use of coffins, to put 
over the dead body on the bier.  
e var-vaaish, s. his pall. M 
marrinagh, s. m. a mariner; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee], Acts, xxvii. 30: As myr va ny 
marrinnee mysh cosney ass y lhong, as er 
lhiggey yn baatey sheese er yn ushtey… And 
as the shipmen were about to flee out of the 
ship, when they had let down the boat into the 
sea. 
mart, s. m. a beef.  
yn vart, the beef. M 
feill vart, s. beef. M 
muirt or muihrt, s. pl. beeves. 
e vuihrt, s. his beeves. [M] 
martar, s. m. a cripple; pl. -yn. 
yn vartar, [s]. the cripple. M 
martarys, s. m. crippleness. 
e vartarys, s. his decrepitude. M 
martlhan, s. f. a maw worm; pl. -yn. 
yn vartlhan, s. the maw-worm. M 
marvanagh, a. mortal. 
s’marvanagh, a. how mortal or frail. M 
s’marvanee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. M 
feer varvanagh, a. very mortal or frail. M 
neu-varvanagh, a. immortal. 
marvanys, s. m. mortality, frailty, frailness. 
e varvanys, s. his mortality, &c. M  
masoonagh, s. m. a mason; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee].  
masoonys, s. m. masonry.  
mast, v. mix, churn; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 88; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
mest, v. mix; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
vast, v. did mix or stir together; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. M  
mastey, v. mixing, stirring, churning. 
dy vastey, v. to mix or stir together. M 
mastit, 85. mixed, churned, stirred. 
ro vastit, 85. too mixed. M 
mestit, 85. mixed; Deu. xv. 4 and 6. [Mestit 
is not in Deu. xv. 4 and 6, though Deu. xv. 
4 and 7 have examples of mast’ (see 
below). No doubt Cregeen intended 
Numbers, xv. 4 and 6: Eisht ver eshyn, ta 
chebbal gys y Chiarn lesh oural-arran, omer dy 
flooyr mestit lesh yn chiarroo ayrn jeh hin 
(mysh three pyntyn) dy ooil. Then shall he that 
offereth his offering unto the Lord bring a meat 
offering of a tenth deal of flour mingled with the 
fourth part of an hin of oil. 
Ny son rea, nee oo kiarail son oural-arran, yn 
wheiggoo ayrn jeh ephah dy flooyr mestit  esh 
yn trass ayrn jeh hin dy ooil ny-chione. Or for a 
ram, thou shalt prepare for a meat offering two 
tenth deals of flour mingled with the third part of 
an hin of oil.]  
mastee, <pl. > [a. d.] of mixing or 
churning. 
laue vastee, a. d. a hand to mix, &c. M 
maidjey mastee, s. m. a mixing stick. 
mastey-bainney, v. churning milk. 
masteyder, s. m. a mixer, a churner. 
yn vasteyder, s. the mixer. M 
mastey, pre. among or amongst, amid or 
amidst, mingled. 
mast’, pre. a contraction of mastey before a 
word beginning with a vowel; as, mast’ain 
(among us); mast’eu (among you); 
mast’eckey (among it or him); mast’eck 
(among her). This last is odd in the English, 
but the Manks requires it, as if a liquid of 
227 
M 
 
the feminine gender is mixed with 
something. 
mayd, pro. we; nee mayd (we will). 
main, pro. us, we; -yn, id. em. See mayd. 
mayl or mayle, s. m. rent. This word is 
written no less than four different ways in 
the Scriptures, the first of these is in Cant. 
viii. 11: Va garey-feeyney ec Solomon ayns 
Baal-hamon, hoie eh yn garey-feeyney rish 
jiuleanyn; va dagh fer jeu son mayl y troar dy 
eeck thousane peesh dy argid. Solomon had a 
vineyard at Baalhamon; he let out the vineyard 
unto keepers; every one for the fruit thereof 
was to bring a thousand pieces of silver; the 
latter in Ezra, iv. 13: Lhig da fys ‘ve ec y ree 
nish, my vees yn ard-valley shoh troggit reesht, 
as ny voallaghyn soit seose, eisht cha jean ad 
geeck mayle, keesh, ny custom, as myr shen 
bee coayl as assee ayns cheet-stiagh y ree. Be 
it known now unto the king, that, if this city be 
builded, and the walls set up again, then will 
they not pay toll, tribute, and custom, and so 
thou shalt endamage the revenue of the kings.  
meyl 
inney-veyl, s. f. a maid or girl that is hired 
for wages, a handmaid;1 Kings, iii. 20: As 
ren ee girree ec y vean-oie, as ghow ee my 
vac’s veih my lhiattee, tra va dty inney-veyl ny 
cadley, as ghow ee eh ’sy n oghrish eck, as 
hug ee yn lhiannoo marroo eck hene ’syn 
oghrish aym’s. And she arose at midnight, and 
took my son from beside me, while thine 
handmaid slept, and laid it in her bosom, and 
laid her dead child in my bosom. 
maail, s. m. rent; pl. -teeyn. 
e vaail, s. his rent; pl. -yn. M 
maaihll, a. d. of rent. 
maill, s. m. rent; pl. -yn. 
maillee, a. d. of rent, having on rent; Acts, 
xxviii. 30: As chum Paul ry daa vlein magh 
ayns e hie maillee hene, goaill-rish dy chooilley 
unnane va cheet huggey. And Paul dwelt two 
whole years in his own hired house, and 
received all that came in unto him.  
eirinagh maillee, s. m. a farmer that holds 
a farm on rent. 
maalys 
far-vaalys, s. m. from faiyr (grass); and 
maail (rent); hired or rented grass; Pro. 
xxvii. 26: Bee ny eayin ta son dty choamrey 
caillit, as farvaalys aber dty ghoair. The lambs 
are for thy clothing, and the goats are the price 
of the field; pl. -syn. 
maynrey, a. happy. 
s’maynrey, a. how happy, comp. and sup. 
M 
feer vaynrey, a. very happy. M 
meevaynrey, a. unhappy. 
neu-vaynrey, a. unhappy, miserable. 
maynrys, s. f. happiness. 
e vaynrys, s. his happiness. M 
maynragh, s. m. a happy person; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
mayrn. See er-mayrn.  
er-mayrn, a. remaining, to fore, left, yet 
alive. 
Mayrnt, s. f. March. 
yn Vayrnt, s. the [M]arch. Prov. “Ta’n 
Vayrnt çhionney as yn nah vee fanney.” 
[March tightens, and the next month flays.] 
M 
mea, a. greasy, fat, luxuriant. 
meay, a. See mea.  
s’mea, a. how fat or greasy, how luxuriant, 
comp. and sup. M 
ro vea or vaa, a. too fat or greasy, too 
luxuriant. M 
coll-mea, s. f. the herb lamb-quarter. 
Perhaps it ought to be kail-mea (a fat or 
luxuriant cole or cabbage). 
luddan-mea, s. f. a luminous oily spot on 
the surface of water; Job, xli. 32: T’eh cur er 
luddan-mea dy hoilshean ny yeï; heillagh fer 
yn diunid dy ve lheeah. He maketh a path to 
shine after him; one would think the deep to be 
hoary. 
meeaylys, s. m. fatness. 
yn veealys, s. the fatness. M 
meaig, s. f. whey; pl. -yn. 
yn veaig, s. the whey. M 
meaigagh, a. wheyish. 
meain or meayn, s. f. mine, ore. 
yn veain or veayn, s. the mine. M 
meainagh or meainey, a. d. of ore, mine, 
&c. 
meaineyder, s. m. a miner; pl. -yn. 
yn veaineyder, s. the miner. M 
228 
M 
 
meaish, s. f. a mease, five hundred of 
herrings. 
un veaish, s. one mease. M 
mean, s. m. middle, interior. 
yn vean, s. the middle. M  
mean-oie, s. m. midnight. 
çhesh-vean 
munlaa, s. m. mid-day, noon, twelve 
o’clock. 
yn vunlaa, s. the mid-day or noon. M 
sy çhesh-vean, s. 5. in the exact middle. 
keylid-mean, s the waist. 
meanagh, a. middlemost, of the middle. 
mee veanagh, s. the middle month. M 
meayl, a. bald, without hair or horns, 
depilous.  
ro veayl, a. too bald or bare. M 
meayll* or meayllee, v. make depilous; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
meayllaghey, v. making bald, baring of 
irregularities.  
er veayllaghey, v. hath, &c. made bald or 
bare of hair, horns, &c. M 
meayllit, 85. made bald or bare.  
meayllee, s. f. a general name for a cow 
without horns. 
yn veayllee, s. the cow void of horns. M 
mee, pro. me, my; as mish meehene (me, 
myself). 
meehene, pro. myself. 
mee, s. f. a month; pl. -aghyn or -ghyn. That 
the Manks had names of their own for the 
months is evident, as mee ny Mannan, mee 
ny Meayllagh, &c.  
yn vee, s. the month; pl. -ghyn. M 
meeagh 
ben veeagh, a. a monthly woman. M 
meeoil 
ben veeoil, a. a menstruous woman. M 
mee, s. f. loin; pl. -ghyn. Scarcely used but in 
the pl.  
dty vee, s. thy loin; pl. -ghyn. M 
e veeghyn dy hymmey, s. his bowels of 
compassion; 1 John, iii. 17: Agh quoi-erbee 
ta cooid y theihll shoh echey, as fakin e vraar 
ayns feme as ta dooney seose e veeghyn dy 
hymmey voish; kys ta graih Yee tannaghtyn 
ayn? But whoso hath this world’s good, and 
seeth his brother have need, and shutteth up 
his bowels of compassion from him, how 
dwelleth the love of God in him? M 
meeiley, s. f. a mile; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
un veeiley, s. one mile; pl. 67. M 
mheeley, s. a mile; pl. 67. See also meeiley.  
yn vheeley, s. the mile. M 
my veelley mhillee ort, my dirty mile on 
thee, or my bad wish on thee. 
meein, a. tame, not wild, fine, soft; 2 Kings, 
xxiii. 6: As hug eh lesh magh jalloo ny keylley 
veih thie yn Chiarn, cheu-mooie jeh Jerusalem, 
gys strooan Kidron, as losht eh eh ec strooan 
Kidron, as vroo eh eh cha meein as joan, as 
spreih eh yn joan er oaiaghyn cloan y phobble. 
And he brought out the grove from the house of 
the Lord, without Jerusalem, unto the brook 
Kidron, and burned it at the brook Kidron, and 
stamped it small to powder, and cast the 
powder thereof upon the graves of the children 
of the people. 
meen, a. patient, dear, fine, mild, meek. 
s’meein or s’meen, a. how tame, meek, 
mild; or how fine, as flour, powder, &c. M 
s’meeiney or s’meeney, a. id. comp. and 
sup. M 
dy meen, adv. patiently, meekly.  
veein, s. pet, dear, darling, favourite, &c. M 
ro veein or veen, a. too fine, small, or 
tame. M  
veen, s. See veein. Mannin veg veen (little 
dear Isle of Man). M 
feer veen, a. very patient, mild, &c.  
clagh-blieh[-]meayn, s. a grindstone. 
neu-veein, a. untame; coarse. 
on[n]ane-veein, s. f. the sow-thistle. 
meeiney, a. pl. tame, fine, soft. 
veeiney, a. pl. tame; fine, small, &c. M 
meeney, a. pl. patient, fine, dear, &c.  
veeney, a. pl. patient, meek, &c. M 
meein, v. tame, assuage, abate; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
meen, v. to make mild, meek, &c.; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88. 
veein or veeinee, v. did tame; make fine, 
229 
M 
 
small, or smooth; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. M 
veenee, v. did abate, appease, &c. M  
meeinaghey, v. taming, getting tame, fine 
or soft.  
meenaghey, v. getting patient, mild, &c.  
dy veeinagh or veeinaghey, v. to tame, 
make fine, small, or smooth; to moderate. 
M  
dy veenagh or veenaghey, v. to abate, 
assuage, appease, allay, or moderate. M 
er veenaghey, v. hath, &c. abated, allayed, 
moderated, &c. M  
meeinit, 85. tamed, abated, softened. 
meenit, 85. See meeinit.  
ro veeinit, 85. too tamed, &c. M  
meeineyder, s. m. one who tames, a tamer. 
yn veeineyder, s. the tamer, &c. M 
meein-chinjagh, a. moderate.  
meein[-]chinjid, s. m. moderation.  
meenid, s. m. patience, meekness. 
e veenid, s. his patience, meekness. M 
meeit, v. meet. Though this word is a 
corruption of the English, yet it is made use 
of in the Manks hymns. For its Manks see 
quaail and quaaltagh. 
meek, s. f. a wink, a twink or twinkle of the 
eye; <Psl. xxxv. 19> [for citation, see 
below, meekey]. 
meek, v. to twink; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
veek, v. did wink, winked; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. M 
meekey or meekeyragh, [v]. winking, 
peeping; [Psl. xxxv. 19: O ny lhig dauesyn ta 
my noidyn boggyssagh harrym dy aggairagh: 
chamoo lhig daue meekey lesh nyn sooillyn ta 
dwoaie oc orrym gyn oyr. O let not them that 
are mine enemies triumph over me ungodly: 
neither let them wink with their eyes that hate 
me without a cause.] Isaiah, viii. 19. Gow-jee 
coyrle jeusyn ta spyrrydyn faishnee oc, as jeh 
ny fir-obbee, ta meekeyragh as tassane. Seek 
unto them that have familiar spirits, and unto 
wizards that peep, and that mutter. 
meekit, 85. winked. 
ro veekit er, a. too winked at. M  
meekey, s. 
yn veekey, s. the wink of the eye. M 
meekey-sooill, s. the twinkling of an eye. 
meekeyder, s. m. a winker; pl. -yn. 
meekagh, a. a person is said to be so that 
keeps his eye lashes nearly closed. 
s’meekagh, a. how meek eyed. M 
s’meekee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. M 
ro veekagh, a. too meek eyed. M 
meel* or meelee, v. moisten, soften; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
veel* or veelee, v. did soften, softened; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. M  
meelaghey, v. softening, &c.  
dy veelagh or veelaghey, v. to soften. M 
meelit, 85. softened, moistened. 
ro veelit, 85. too softened. M 
meeleyder, s. m. a softener. 
yn veeleyder, s. the softener. M 
meeley, a. soft, moist, fine to the touch; a. 
pl; id. em. (sic). 
s’meeley, a. how moist, soft, yielding to 
the touch. M 
feer veeley, a. very soft or moist. M 
meer, s. f. a piece; pl. -yn. We have this word 
still retained in our language agreeable to 
that meaning, 1. Sam. xiii. 20: Agh hie 
ooilley ny Israeliteyn sheese gys ny Philistinee, 
dagh dooinney dy choyrt skian er e hock, as 
meer er e choulter, dy shleeu e heigh, as e 
chiebbey. But all the Israelites went down to the 
Philistines, to sharpen every man his share, 
and his coulter, and his axe, and his mattock; it 
is the proper Manks of piece; the word 
peeish, which is too often made use of, is 
only a corruption of the English. Why some 
insist that it means bread may be easily 
accounted for; as, give the child a piece. 
Cur meer da’n lhiannoo (give a piece of 
bread to the child). The above ellipsis may 
account for it. It is often the case that an 
article used in an action is called the action 
itself; for instance, tea for the meal, &c. 
dty veer, s. thy piece; pl. -yn. M  
meer, v. piece; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
meeraghey, v. piecing, or putting pieces 
together. 
dy veeraghey, v. to piece. M 
meereyder, s. m. piecer; pl. -yn. 
230 
M 
 
meeyl, s. f. a louse; pl. -yn. 
yn veeyl, s. the louse; pl. -lyn. M  
meeyl cheyrragh, s. f. a sheep-louse. 
meeyl chreen, s. f. a small worm or grub 
that eats away timber, also one that burrows 
under a person’s skin and causes great itch, 
and on which is the following couplet:  
“Dy beagh ee er e bolg myr t’ee er e 
dreeym, 
Shimmey mac dooinney yinnagh ee harrish 
y cheym.” [If it were on its belly as it is on 
its back, many a son of man would it do 
over the stile.] 
meeyllagh, a. lousy. 
s’meeylagh, a. how lousy. M  
s’meeylee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. 
ro veeyllagh, a. too lousy. M 
meg, s. f. a cosset, a pet lamb.  
meih, s. m. a balance, a weight, a scale; mult, 
much; pl. -aghyn. 
veigh or veih, s. scale or balance; pl. 
-aghyn, Rev. vi. 5: As yeeagh mee, as 
honnick mee cabbyl doo; as v’echeysyn va 
markiagh er piyr dy veihaghyn ayns e laue. 
And I beheld, and lo a black horse; and he that 
sat on him had a pair of balances in his hand. 
M 
veih, s. a balance; pl. -aghyn, Isa. xlvi. 6: 
T’ad dy feoilt deayrtey magh airh ass y sporran, 
as towse argid ayns y veih, as t’ad failley 
gaaue-airh, as ta eshyn jannoo jee jeh. They 
lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh silver in 
the balance, and hire a goldsmith; and he 
maketh it a god. See veigh. M  
meih, v. balance, weigh; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
veigh or veih, v. did weigh or balance; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 84. M  
meihey or meighey, v. 
dy veihey or veighey, v. to weigh or 
balance. M  
meihaghey, v. weighing, balancing. 
er veihaghey, v. hath, &c., balanced or 
weighed. M  
meihit, 85. weighed, balanced. 
meiheyder, s. m. one that weighs. 
meil, s. f. a lip; pl. -lyn. 
dty veil, s. thy lip; pl. -lyn. M 
meil-baa, s. f. cowslip, preagle, pollianther. 
meilley, s. f. a basin, a bowl; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn]. 
yn veilley, s. the basin or bowl. M  
meinn, s. f. meal; pl. -yn. 
yn veinn, s. the meal. M  
yn ghiare-veinn, s. the groats. G 
meinney, a. pl. [sic] meal; a. d. of meal. 
koir veinney, a. d. of meal box or chest. M 
meiygh, a. benign, tender; 2 Kings, xxii. 19: 
Er-yn-oyr dy row dty chree meiygh, as dy vel 
oo er injillaghey oo-hene kiongoyrt rish y 
Chiarn… Because thine heart was tender, and 
thou hast humbled thyself before the Lord…. 
s’meiygh, a. how tender. M 
s’meiyghey, a. id., comp. and sup. M 
feer veiygh, a. very mild or tender, benign 
or gentle. M 
meiygh, v. to be benign; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
meiyghey, v. yearning with tenderness or 
benignity. 
meiyghaghey, v. 
dy veiyghaghey, v. to yearn with 
tenderness. M  
meiyghit or meiyght, 85. drawn out in 
tenderness, &c. 
meiyghid, s. m. benignity, tenderness. 
meiyghagh 
ro veiyghagh, a. too tender or benign. M 
meiyghys 
e veiyghys, s. his benignity. M  
mennee, s. f. an awl; pl. -yn; Exod. xxi. 6: 
Eisht ver e vainshtyr lesh eh fenish ny briwnyn; 
as ver eh lesh eh myrgeddin gys y dorrys, ny 
gys essyn y dorrys: as ver e vainshtyr mennee 
trooid e chleaysh; as nee eh shirveish eh choud 
as s’bio eh. Then his master shall bring him 
unto the judges; he shall also bring him to the 
door, or unto the door post; and his master 
shall bore his ear through with an aul; and he 
shall serve him for ever. 
yn vennee, s. the awl. M 
mennick, a. often, frequent. 
s’mennick, a. how often or frequent. M 
s’mennickey or s’menkey, a. id., comp. 
and sup; Acts, xxiv. 26: V’eh jerkal neesht dy 
beagh Paul er chur argid da, cour cosney e 
reamys: shen-y-fa v’eh cur fys er ny 
s’mennickey dy loayrt rish. He hoped also that 
231 
M 
 
money should have been given him of Paul, 
that he might loose him: wherefore he sent for 
him the oftener, and communed with him. M 
ro vennick, a. too often, too frequent. M  
anvennick. ad[v]. seldom, not often. 
menkid or mennickid, s. m. frequency. 
meoir, s. m. a moar, a man sworn to collect 
the Lord’s rent of a parish. 
yn veoir, s. the moar or collector of crown 
rent. M 
meoir-agglish, s. m. a beadle. 
meoirsnys, s. m. the moarship. 
yn veoirsnys, s. the moarship. M 
merg 
s[’]merg, in. wo, a denunciation of 
calamity. 
s[’]mergey, a. more or most woful. 
gall-verg, s. f. bitter spite, or fury 
accompanied with revenge.  
mergagh 
gall-vergagh, a. spiteful to an extreme, 
most ferocious. 
yn veishteig vergagh, s. the canker worm. 
B 
merg* or mergee, v. rust; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
mergit, 85. rusted. 
ro vergit, a. too rusty or rusted. M  
mergagh, a. rusty. 
s’mergagh, a. how rusty. M 
s’mergee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. M 
feer vergagh, a. very rusty. M 
mergeyder, s. m. something that rusts.  
mergey or mergys, s. m. rust. 
mergid or mergys, s. m. rustiness. 
yn vergid, s. the rustiness. M 
yn vergys, s. the rust. M 
mergey, s. m. ensign; Isa. xxx. 17: …derrey 
vees shiu faagit myr aile son cowrey-caggee er 
mullagh slieau, as myr mergey er cronk. …till 
ye be left as a beacon upon the top of a 
mountain, and as an ensign on an hill. 
merre, s. f. stupor, deadness of design to what 
is right, and, as it were, propelled to do 
what is wrong. 
merre-cheilley, s. f. deadness of wit or 
sense.  
merrioose, s. f. stupor, sluggishness. 
meshtal, a. drunken. 
feer veshtal, a. very drunken. M  
meshtey. See er-meshtey.  
er-meshtey, a. drunk or drunken. Prov. 
“Laa er-meshtey as laa er ushtey.” [A day 
drunk and a day on (i.e. drinking) water.] 
meshtalagh or meshteylagh, s. m. a 
drunkard; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
yn veshtallagh or veshteylagh, s. the 
drunkard. M 
meshtallys <or meshteylagh>, s. m. 
drunkenness; Rom. xiii. 13 [NB meshtyrys 
in the text cited]: Lhig dooin gimmeeaght dy 
onneragh myr ayns y laa: cha nee ayns 
rouanys as meshtyrys, cha nee ayns cloie as 
reaid, cha nee ayns streeu as troo. Let us walk 
honestly, as in the day; not in rioting and 
drunkenness, not in chambering and 
wantonness, not in strife and envying.  
meshteylys, s. m. inebriation, intoxication, 
ebriety, ebriosity. See also meshtallys. 
e veshtallys or veshteylys, s. his 
drunkenness. M  
mess, s. m. fruit. 
yn vess, s. the fruit. M 
messoil, a. fruitful, fertile. 
s’messoil, a. how fruitful, comp. and sup. 
M 
feer vessoil, a. very fruitful. M 
neu-vessoil, a. unfruitful, infertile, 
infecund 
messoilid, s. m. fruitfulness. 
yn vessoillid, s. the fruitfulness. M 
mettey, a. tender, delicate.  
feer vettey, a. very tender. M 
mettey-ys, s. m. delicacy, delicateness; 
Deu. xxviii. 56: Yn ven seyr as mettey ny 
mast’ eu nagh jinnagh e cass y choyrt er y 
laare son moyrn as mettey-ys, bee drogh hooill 
eck gys sheshey e oghrish, gys e mac, as gys 
e inneen. The tender and delicate woman 
among you, which would not adventure to set 
the sole of her foot upon the ground for 
delicateness and tenderness, her eye shall be 
evil toward the husband of her bosom, and 
toward her son, and toward her daughter. 
e vetteyid or vettys, s. his tenderness. M 
meydlagh, a. (from mooad), heavy and slow 
in moving on account of size. 
232 
M 
 
feer veyhdlagh, a. very unwieldy. M 
meydlid, s. m. slowness and inactivity in 
moving. 
e veyhdlid or veyhdlys, s. unwieldiness. M 
mheddyr, s. f. a pail, a vessel like a noggin. 
yn vheddyr, s. the pail, or piggin. M 
mheil, s. f. a company of reapers or shearers 
in a field cutting corn; pl. -yn. The Welsh 
has medal for the same.  
yn vheil, s. the company of reapers. M  
mheillea, s. f. the term is used for the 
finishing of reaping corn; from mheil (a 
company of reapers), and ea from fea (the 
reapers’ rest).  
yn vheillea, s. the harvest feast. M  
mhill, v. mar, moil, spoil, dirty; or render 
useless. This word is written mill; Jam. iii. 
6: As ta’n chengey ny aile, seihll dy vee-
chairys: myr shen ta’n chengey mastey ny oltyn 
ain, dy vel ee milhey yn slane corp, as cur yn 
seihll bun-ry-skyn; as t’ee soit er aile liorish 
niurin. And the tongue is a fire, a world of 
iniquity: so is the tongue among our members, 
that it defileth the whole body, and setteth on 
fire the course of nature; and it is set on fire of 
hell; but for the better sound’s sake and a 
difference from mill (honey), the h is 
inserted; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
vhill, v. did dirty, spoil, or render useless; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. M 
mhilley, v. marring, spoiling, dirtying. 
dy vhilley, v. to spoil, mar, moil, or dirty. 
M 
mhillee, a. d. of marring or spoiling. 
my veelley mhillee ort, my dirty mile on 
thee, or my bad wish on thee. 
mhillit, 85. spoiled, marred, &c.; Jer. xviii. 
4: As va’n saagh craie v’eh dy yannoo mhillit 
ayns laue yn phasheyder; myrshen dy ren eh 
jeh reesht saagh elley, myr s’mie lesh hene dy 
yannoo eh. And the vessel that he made of clay 
was marred in the hand of the potter: so he 
made it again another vessel, as seemed good 
to the potter to make it. 
s’millit, a. how spoiled. M 
ro vhillit, a. too spoiled, &c. M 
mhilleyder, s. m. a marrer, spoiler, &c. 
yn vhilleyder, s. the spoiler, &c. M  
mhinoogh, v. yawning, gaping. 
dty vhinoogh, v. to yawn or gape. M 
mhinoyr or minoyragh, a. mellow, mealy. 
menoyr or mhenoyragh, a. (myn and 
ooir), mellow, mealy, goodly; Jer. xi. 16: 
Ren y Chiarn uss y enmys, Billey-olive glass, 
aalin, as lesh mess menoyr; lesh feiyr anveagh 
t’eh er voaddey aile er, as ta ny banglaneyn 
eck er ny vrishey. The Lord called thy name, A 
green olive tree, fair, and of goodly fruit: with 
the noise of a great tumult he hath kindled fire 
upon it, and the branches of it are broken. 
mhinoyrey, a. pl. mellow, mealy. 
feer vhinoyr or vhinoyragh, a. very 
mellow or mealy. M  
s’mhenoyr or s’mhenoyragh, a. how 
mealy or mellow. M 
s’mhenoyrey or s’mhe[n]oyree, a. id., 
comp. and sup. M 
mhinoyrid, s. m. mellowness, mealiness. 
menoyrid, s. m. mellowness. 
e vhinoyrid or vhinoyrys, s. his 
mellowness. M 
mhioyr, s. m. the sense of feeling and touch 
acuteness of feeling, &c. 
mioyr, s. See mhioyr. 
e vhioyr, s. his feeling or use of faculties. 
M 
mhioyral, a. having the power and sense of 
feeling, and the use of the members. 
feer vhioyral, a. very acute of feeling. M 
mhollim, a. friable, earthy, ready to fall to 
pieces when applied to earth; when applied 
to fruit, mellow or getting rotten.  
mholmey, a. pl. friable, brittle, mellow. 
ro vhollim, a. too friable or brittle. M  
mholm* or mholmee, v. moulder, make 
friable or earthy; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
mholmaghey, v. mouldering, making 
friable, earthy, or mellow. 
er vholmagh, v. hath, &c., got friable. M 
mholmeyder, s. m. a crumbler, a moulder, 
or something that renders friable. 
mholmid, s. m. friableness, mellowness. 
e vholmid, s. his friability. M 
mhuinneel, s. f. a sleeve.  
e vhuinneel, s. his sleeve. M 
e whuineel, s. his sleeve. M  
233 
M 
 
doarn mhuinneel, s. f. a cuff. 
fent-mhuineel, s. f. a wrist-band. 
mhuinneelagh 
smock whuineellagh, a. a shift having 
sleeves. M  
mial, a. mansuete, mild, gentle, lenient, good 
natured. 
mialys, s. m. mansuetude, mildness, 
clemency, lenity.  
mian, s. m. (sounded mean), appetite, eager 
wish for some thing, a fond or hankering 
desire.  
e vian, s. his eager wish or fond desire; 
Isaiah xxix. 8: Bee eh eer myr tra ta dooinney 
accryssagh dreamal, as er-lesh dy vel eh gee; 
agh t’eh doostey, as ta e volg shang: ny myr tra 
ta dooinney paagh dreamal, as er-lesh dy vel 
eh giu; agh t’eh doostey, as cur-my-ner t’eh 
annoon as cha vel e vian jeant magh. It shall 
even be as when an hungry man dreameth, 
and, behold, he eateth; but he awaketh, and his 
soul is empty: or as when a thirsty man 
dreameth, and, behold, he drinketh; but he 
awaketh, and, behold, he is faint, and his soul 
hath appetite. M 
by-vian, v. would fain; Luke, xv. 16: As by-
vian lesh e volg y lhieeney lesh ny bleaystyn va 
ny muckyn dy ee: as cha row dooinney erbee 
hug cooney da. And he would fain have filled 
his belly with the husks that the swine did eat: 
and no man gave unto him. 
gliee[-]mian, s. f. concupiscence, lust. 
miandagh, a. fond, longing for, having an 
appetite for, minded for, desirable; s. m. a 
person longing for something; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
s’miandagh, a. how earnestly wished for, 
longed for, how desirous to the mind, or 
appetite. M 
s’miandee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. M 
ro viandagh, a. too hankering after, too 
fond of, longing too much for or after. M 
miandid, s. m. eagerness of appetite, or 
mind for something desirable. 
Mian, s. m. Matthew, Matthias. The both 
names are so called according to the old 
phrase: “Laa’l Mian carragh skaa yn arroo 
sy n’ouyr, as marroo ny eayin sy 
n’arragh.” [St. Matthew’s Day scurvy 
sheds the corn in the autumn, and kills the 
lambs in the spring. The feast of St. 
Matthias is held on the 25th of February, 
and that of St. Matthew on the 21st of 
September.  
e Vian, s. his Matthew or Matthias. M 
mie, a. good; s. m. good, weal.  
yn vie, s. the good. M 
mienyn, s. pl. virtues; <Ecclesiasticus> 
[Wisdom of Solomon] viii. 7: As my ta 
dooinney graihagh er yn ynrickys, t’ee 
gymmyrkey mieyn (sic): son t’ee gynsaghey 
sheeltys as tushtey, cairys as dunnallys; lheid 
ny giootyn as nagh vod ny s’vondeishee ’ve ec 
deiney ayns ooilley nyn mea. And if a man love 
righteousness her labours are virtues: for she 
teacheth temperance and prudence, justice and 
fortitude: which are such things, as men can 
have nothing more profitable in their life. 
e vienyn, s. his virtues. M 
dy mie, adv. well. 
feer vie, a. very good, very well. M 
mie-ey, a. pl. good. 
fir vie-ey, a. pl. good ones. M 
s’mie, a. how good, well of. Prov. “S’mie 
ve daaney agh s’olk ve ro ghaaney.” [’Tis 
good to be bold, but bad to be too bold.] M  
mie-chreegh, a. well disposed, good 
hearted. 
mie dy liooar, adv. well enough. 
chammah, adv. (from cho-mie), as well.  
lane vie, a. indifferent, middling, very well. 
thurn-mie, s. a good turn or job. 
mieys, s. f. goodness. 
e vieys, s. his goodness. M 
share, a. better, best; as, ny share (better) 
yn dooinney share (the best man) the comp. 
and sup. of mie (and so for all the 
adjectives). See also 58.  
The possessive pronouns might here be 
all joined to this, as in the case of bare [see 
below], and the meaning the same, but in 
the present tense; as, share-da, share-lhiam, 
share-lhiat, &c. Prov.”Share soie son veg, 
na roie son veg.” [Better to sit for little 
than run for little.] 
share, v. to better, improve, &c.; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
234 
M 
 
sharagh or sharaghey, v. getting better, 
improving, getting in a state of 
convalescence. 
shareit, 85. bettered, improved. 
shareid, s. m. preferableness, superiority. 
cha çhare-lhiam, I would not rather. S. 
nagh nhare, a. is it not better or best. S  
bare, a. best, the <future> [past] of share.  
ny bare, better.  
bare da, best for him.  
 bare dasyn, best for him, em.  
 bare j’ee, best for her.  
 bare j’eeish, best for her, em.  
 bare daue, best for them.  
 bare dauesyn, best for them, em.  
 bare dou, best for me.  
 bare dooys, best for me, em.  
 bare dooin, best for us. 
 bare dooinyn, best for us, em.  
 bare dhyt, best for thee.  
 bare dhyts, best for thee, em.  
 bare diu, best for you or ye.  
 bare diuish, best for you, em.  
bare lesh, he would rather.  
 bare leshyn, he would rather, em.  
 bare lhee, she would rather.  
 bare lheeish, she would rather, em.  
 bare lhieu, they would rather.  
 bare lhieusyn <or lhieuish>, they, &c., 
would rather, em.  
 bare lhiam, I would rather; Prov. “Cha 
row rieau bare-lhiam jeant magh.” I would 
rather was never satisfied.  
 bare lhiams, I would rather, em.  
 bare lhiat, thou wouldst rather.  
 bare lhiats, thou wouldst rather, em.  
 bare [lhieuish, you] &c., would rather, 
em.  
 bare lhien, we would rather.  
 bare lhienyn, we would rather, em.  
mill, s. m. honey; mill er meer (honey on a 
piece). 
yn vill, s. the honey. M 
geirr-vill, s. f. bees’ wax, honey wax. 
millish, a. sweet. Prov. “Millish dy ghoaill 
agh sharroo dy eeck.” [Sweet to take but 
bitter to pay.] 
feer villish, a. very sweet. M 
s’millish a. how sweet, with what 
sweetness. M 
smiljey, a. sweeter, sweetest, the comp. and 
sup. of millish (sweet). 
duillag villish, s. f. costmary, alcost. 
lus [v]illish ny lheeanagh, s. f. meadow 
sweet. 
miljey, a. pl. sweet; Cant. i. 3: Son blass dty 
ooilyn miljey, ta dty ennym myr ooil er ny 
gheayrtey; shen-y-fa ta ny moidynyn ayns graih 
rhyt. Because of the savour of thy good 
ointments thy name is as ointment poured forth, 
therefore do the virgins love thee.  
milljaghey, v. sweetening. 
miljeyder, s. m. a confectioner; pl. -yn. 
milljid or milljys, s. f. sweetness. 
e viljid, s. his sweetness. M 
milljag, s. f. (from milljough), a sweet 
drink, ale before the hop is added, mead. 
molley, a. d. of sweetness; Psl. xix. 10, 
Manks metre. 
S’baght soylit huc ta meanyn airh, 
Ny’n airh hene ta rö it voue. 
Yn vill, ny kerenyn-molley hene, 
Cha vel cha millish roo. 
[They (the judgements of the Lord) are directly 
comparable to mines of gold, or the gold itself 
that flows from them; honey, or honeycombs 
themselves, are not so sweet as they. MWW] 
kere volley, a. sweet comb, honey comb. 
This word volley comes from millish, 
(sweet); and means a. d. of sweetness. M 
kere-[v]ol<v>ley, s. f. honey comb, or 
rather a sweet comb; as the volley here 
comes from millish. 
lus y volley, s. f. lady’s bed-straw. 
millchea, s. m. mildew. Some might think 
this word an Anglicism, but I rather think 
the English word a Gaelicism, the mill from 
mar or moil, and kay mist (millkay).  
millcheait, 85. mildewed. 
milley, s. m. a million; 1 Chron. xxi. 5: As 
ooilley adsyn jeh Israel v’ad, milley as keead 
thousane dy gheiney va son tayrn y cliwe. And 
all they of Israel were a thousand thousand and 
an hundred thousand men that drew sword. 
yn villey. See yn vhille, the million. M 
un vhille, s. one million. M 
dy vhillaghyn, s. of millions. M 
235 
M 
 
mimmey, s. f. a godmother; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn]. 
dty vimmey, s. thy female sponsor at the 
font. M 
ming, v. pinch, nip, bite; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
ving, v. did bite or pinch; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. M 
mingey, v. pinching, nipping, &c. 
er vingey, v. hath, &c., bit or pinched. M 
mingit, 85. pinched, nipped. 
ro vingit, a. too bit or pinched. M 
mingeyder, s. m. a pincher, a nipper. 
mhinag, s. f. a pinch, a nip; pl. -yn. 
yn vhinag, s. the pinch or nip. M 
minjeig, s. f. a bundle of heather, &c. 
minjeig, s. f. a young hind or roe. 
yn vinjeig, s. the kid of a hind. M 
minnag 
lus ny minnag, s. f. dandelion, piss-a-bed. 
minnagh, s. m. guts, bowels, entrails, pith. 
yn vinnagh, s. the guts, entrails or bowels, 
the pith of timber. M 
e vynnagh, s. his bowels; Job, xx. 14: Ny-
yeih ta e vee ayns e vynnagh jiooldagh da, te 
gall ard-nieughyn cheu sthie jeh. Yet his meat 
in his bowels is turned, it is the gall of asps 
within him. See vinnagh. M 
minnid, s. f. a minute; pl. -yn. 
yn vinnid, s. the minute. M 
miol, v. tempt, entice; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
viol* or viollee, v. did tempt o tempted. 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. M 
miolaghey, v. tempting, enticing, &c. 
dty violley, v. thy tempting. M 
dy viollagh, v. to tempt. M 
er viollagh, v. hath, &c., tempted. M 
miolit, 85. tempted, tried. 
ro viollit, a. too tempted. M 
mioleyder, s. m. a tempter, &c.; pl. -yn. 
yn violleyder, s. the tempter. M 
miolagh, s. m. a temptation, &c.; pl. -yn. 
yn viollagh, s. the temptation. M 
mirril, s. f. a miracle; pl. -yn. 
mirrilagh, a. miraculous. 
s’mirrilagh, a. how miraculous. M  
s’mirrilee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. M 
mish, pro. me, emphatically. 
missilagh, a. precarious, fickle. 
feer vissilagh, a. very precarious. M 
missilid, s. m. uncertainty, &c.  
yn vissilid, s. the uncertainty, &c. M 
mitçhoor, s. m. a rogue. 
mitçhooragh, a. roguish, mischievous. 
s’mitçhooragh, a. how roguish, 
mischievous, or fraudulent. M 
s’mitçhooree, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. 
M 
mitçhooraght, s. f. roguishness, mischief. 
mithan, s. f. a mitten, a glove; pl. -yn. 
yn vitthan, s. the mitten or glove. M 
moal, a. mean, meagre, poor, gaunt, 
despicable, sorry, dim.  
s’moal, a. how mean, poor, male, 
despicable. Some persons use smoailley as 
the comp. and sup. of this word, but I prefer 
smelley. M  
s’melley, a. more or most mean, male, 
poor, despicable, the comp. and sup. of 
moal. M 
feer voal, a. very poor, mean, or 
despicable. M  
moalley, or, as in Deu. xxviii. 65, 
moaldey, a. pl. poor, mean, meagre, 
despicable, sorry, and when applied to 
sight, dim: …agh ver y Chiarn dhyt ayns shen 
cree er-creau, as sooillyn moaldey, as sou-
aigney. …but the Lord shall give thee there a 
trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and sorrow 
of mind. 
voalley, a. pl. mean, despicable. M 
yn voal-hushtagh, s. the person having no 
great share of knowledge, a fool; Prov. 
xxix. 20: Vel oo cur-my-ner dooinney ta 
siyragh ayns e ghoan? ta caslys share jeh’n 
voal-hushtagh na jehsyn. Seest thou a man 
that is hasty in his words? there is more hope 
of a fool than of him. M  
meillid, s. m. (from moal), despicableness, 
meanness, degeneracy, poorness.  
e veillid, s. his despicableness, &c. M 
mellid-chree, s. f. melancholy. 
236 
M 
 
moandagh, a. blunt, not acute, dull on the 
edge, faultering, stammering, feeble; 
Isaiah, xxxii. 4: Nee yn cree ocsyn myrgeddin 
ta gyn tort toiggal tushtey, as nee yn chengey 
moandagh loayrt dy floaill. The heart also of 
the rash shall understand knowledge, and the 
tongue of the stammerers shall be ready to 
speak plainly.  
s’moandagh, a. how blunt, dull, feeble, not 
acute. M 
s’moandee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. M 
feer voandagh, a. very faltering; blunt, 
feeble, dull. M 
fer moandagh, s. m. a fumbler.  
moandid or moandys, s. m. dul[l]ness, 
bluntness. 
moar, v. moor, or tie in a harbour; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. 
voar, v. did moor; -agh; -in; -ym; -ys, 94 
M  
moaral, v. mooring. 
er voaral, v. hath, &c. moored. M 
moarit, 85. moored. 
ro voarit, a. too moored. M 
moareyder, s. m. one that moors. 
moaryn 
e voaryn, s. his moorings. M 
moayn or moayin, s. f. turf. 
yn voayn, s. the turf or peat. M 
moanagh, a. d. of or belonging to turf.  
moaney or moanagh, a. [d.] turfy, of turf; 
as, grunt moaney (turfy ground). 
creagh voaney, a. d. a stack of turf. M  
s’moanagh, a. how turfy. M 
s’moanee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. M 
feer voanagh, a. very turfy. M 
moanee, s. f. a turbary, a field of turfy soil; 
pl. moaintyn [? pl. of moayn] or 
moaneeyn. 
yn voanee or voaynee, s. the turbary, the 
field of turfy soil. M  
moddey, s. m. a dog. 
yn voddey, s. the dog. Prov. “Ceau craue 
ayns beeal drogh voddey.” [Throwing a 
bone in a bad dog’s mouth] and “Baase y 
derrey voddey grayse y voddey elley.” [The 
death of the one dog is the grace of the 
other.] M  
moddee, s. pl. dogs. Prov. “Ta ny moddee 
er chur nyn gione sy phot” [The dogs have 
put their heads in the pot]; and, “Rouyr 
moddee as beggan craueyn” [Too many 
dogs and few bones.] 
e voddee, s. his dogs. M 
moddey airh, s. m. a mock sun. 
moddey oaldey, s. m. a wolf. 
creayn-voddee, s. f. the herb dog’s 
mercury. 
faiyr-voddee, s. f. couch grass. 
moddagh, a. doggish.  
moggyl, s. m. a mesh; pl. -yn, or mogglyn [or 
moggil, see below]. 
yn voggyl, s. the mesh. [M]  
e voggil, s. his meshes. M 
mogglagh, a. of mesh or net. 
moghey, a. early. 
s’moghey, a. how early, comp. and sup. M 
feer voghey, a. very early. M 
mogheyid or moghid, s. m. earliness. 
e voghid, s. his earliness. M 
moghrey, s. m. morning. A contraction of this 
word is used when Manks people meet 
each other of a morning; they say mo’rey, 
which is so like morrow that people who do 
not understand the language imagine they 
speak of tomorrow. To pluralize, the y 
changes to eyn [i.e. moghreeyn]. Prov. 
“Foddee fastyr grianagh ve ec moghrey 
bodjalagh.” [Maybe a sunny evening will 
follow a cloudy morning.] 
yn voghrey, s. the morning. M 
mohlt, s. m. a mutton. 
muihlt, s. pl. muttons. The pl. of mohlt.  
yn vohlt, s. the mutton. M 
yn voult, s. the mutton. M  
e vhoult, s. his mutton. M 
mhuiltçhin, s. m. a two year old mutton. 
moidyn, s. f. a virgin, a maiden. 
yn voidyn, s. the virgin or maiden. M  
moidynagh, a. virginal. 
voidynagh, a. virginal. M  
moidynys, s, f. virginity, maidenhead. 
voidynys, s. virginity. M 
moir, s. f. mother, a female parent, a dam; 
Exod. xxii. 30: Nee oo er yn aght cheddin rish 
dty ghew, as rish dty chirree; rish shiaght laa 
237 
M 
 
bee eh er e voir, er yn hoghtoo laa ver oo 
dooys eh. Likewise shalt thou do with thine 
oxen, and with thy sheep: seven days it shall 
be with his dam; on the eighth day thou shalt 
give it me.  
e voir, s. his mother. M 
liass voir, s. f. a step mother.  
mayrey, a. d. of a mother, maternal. 
vayrey, a. d. of a mother. M  
keeayll-vairey, s. f. mother’s wit. 
moir-ny-ushtaghyn, s. f. a source of the 
waters; 2 Kings, ii. 21: As hie eh magh gys 
moir ny ushtaghyn, as hilg eh yn sollan ayns 
shen, as dooyrt eh, Myr shoh ta’n Chiarn dy 
ghra, Ta mee er lheihys ny ushtaghyn shoh, 
cha bee ad veih shoh magh neu-follan, ny’n 
thalloo gennish. And he went forth unto the 
spring of the waters, and cast the salt in there, 
and said, Thus saith the Lord, I have healed 
these waters; there shall not be from thence 
any more death or barren land. 
moiragh or moiroil, a. motherly, maternal. 
Moirrey, s. f. Mary. 
Oie’l Woirrey, s. Mary’s night. M  
Laa’l Moirrey ny Gianle, s. m. 
Candlemas-day, kept on the second of 
February. Prov. “Laa’l Moirrey ny Gianle, 
lieh foddyr as lieh aile.” [Mary’s Feast Day 
of the candles, i.e., Candlemas, half fodder 
and half fire.] 
Laa’l Moirrey ny Sansh or Sanish, s. m. 
the Annunciation-day, kept by the church 
on the 25th day of March.  
onnane-Voirrey, s. f. the cardus-thistle. 
mol, s. m. a nave, a mould; pl. -yn. 
yn vol, s. the nave, the mould to cast 
anything in. M 
molg, s. f. a milt; pl. -yn. 
yn volg, s. the milt. M  
molgagh, a. having milt or milts. 
feer volgagh, a. very milty. M 
molk, v. macerate, mortify, rot; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88.  
volk, v. did macerate or putrify; -agh; -ee; 
-ys, 94. M  
molkagh or molkaghey, v. macerating, the 
first stage of fermentation to rottenness. 
dy volkaghey, v. to macerate, to putrify. M 
molkey, v. rotting, putrifying. 
molkit, 85. macerated, putrified. 
ro volkit, a. too macerated. M 
moll, v. deceive, cheat, dupe, disappoint; Mat. 
xxiv. 4: Cur-jee twoaie nagh moll dooinney 
erbee shiu. Take heed that no man deceive 
you; Prov. “My yial dyn moll” [My promise 
without deceit]. -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
voll, v. did deceive or cheat, did disappoint; 
-agh; -ee; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. M  
molley, v. deceiving, cheating, 
disappointing. 
dy volley, v. to cheat or deceive, &c. M  
mollit, 85. cheated, deceived, duped, 
disappointed, mistaken. 
s’mollit, a. how deceived or cheated. M 
molleyder, s. m. one who disappoints. 
yn volleyde[r], s. the disappointer. M  
molteyr, s. m. a deceiver, a cheat, an 
imposter; Prov. “Mollee yn molteyr oo my 
oddys eh.” [The rogue will deceive you if 
he can]. 
yn volteyr, s. the deceiver, rogue or cheat. 
M  
 molteyragh, a. deceitful, fraudulent, 
insidious. 
 s’molteyragh, a. how deceitful. M 
 s’molteyree, a. id., comp. and sup. M 
 ro volteyragh, a. too deceitful, roguish, 
&c. M  
 molteyrys, s. m. fraud, deceit, 
imposition, duplicity. 
 e volteyrys, s. his deceit, fraud, &c. M 
mollag, s. f. a buoy; pl. -yn. 
yn vollag, s. the buoy. M 
mollagh, a. rough, rugged. 
s’mollagh, a. how rough, how hairy. M 
s’mollee, a. id., comp. and sup. M 
ro vollagh, a. too rough. M 
bossan mollagh, s. m. a species of ragwort. 
drein[-]mollagh, s. m. the bird tomtit. 
mollid, s. m. roughness, ruggedness. 
e vollid, s. his roughness. M 
mollaght, s. m. a curse; pl. -yn. 
yn vollaght, s. the curse. M  
mollaght-mynney, s. m. an execration, a 
curse of curses, a double curse; Jer. xlii. 18, 
and xliv. 12: …myr shen vees my eulys er ny 
238 
M 
 
gheayrtey magh erriuish, tra hed shiu gys 
Egypt: as bee shiu son ard-vollaght, as son 
atchim, as son mollaght-mynney, as son 
oltooan, as cha vaik shiu yn ynnyd shoh arragh. 
…so shall my fury be poured forth upon you, 
when ye shall enter into Egypt: and ye shall be 
an execration, and an astonishment, and a 
curse, and a reproach; and ye shall see this 
place no more. — …yiow ad ooilley baase, 
beg as mooar, lesh y chliwe as y ghortey: as 
bee ad son ard-vollaght, as son atchim, as son 
mollaght-mynney, as son oltooan…. they shall 
die, from the least even unto the greatest, by 
the sword and by the famine: and they shall be 
an execration, and an astonishment, and a 
curse, and a reproach. 
ard-vollaght, s. m. an execration; Jer. xlii. 
18: [see above, under mollaght-mynney]. 
cloan-ny-mollaght, s. pl. cursed children. 
co-vollaght 
yn cho-vollaght, s. the conspiracy; Acts, 
xxiii. 13: As va erskyn da-eed jeu fo yn cho-
vollaght shoh. And they were more than forty 
which had made this conspiracy. C.  
macmollaght, s. m. son of a curse, son of 
perdition, the devil. 
mollaghtagh, a. cursed, accursed, 
blasphemous. 
s’mollaghtagh, a. how accursed. M 
s’mollaghtee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. 
M 
ro vollaghtagh, a. too cursed or 
blasphemous. M  
mollaghtid 
e vollaghtid, s. his cursedness. M  
mollee, s. f. the eye brow; pl. -yn. 
e vollee, s. his eye brow. M 
mong, v. smile, smirk; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
vong. v. did smile or smirk; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. M 
mongey, v. smiling, smirking. 
dy vongey, v. to smile, to smirk. M 
mongit er, 85. smiled on. 
mong, s. 
e vong, s. his smile or smirk. M 
mongeyder, s. m. a smiler; pl. -yn. 
yn vongeyder, s. the smiler. M 
monney, a. much, many; mostly used 
negatively. 
yn vonney, s. the much, the many. M 
monney, s. m. manner, meaning.  
cre’n vonney (sic), s. what manner, what 
meaning. [The Bible has cre’n monney x9.] 
M 
mooad 
yn vooad, s. the size. bulk or bigness. M  
e wooad, s. his size, bigness. M 
cre-woad, adv. how much. 
cre wooad keayrt, how many times. M 
mooads or mooadys, s. m. greatness, size, 
bulk, extremity; Job, xxxv. 15: Agh nish, er-
yn-oyr nagh vel eh goaill kerraghey ayns e 
yymmoose, as nagh vel Job ayns mooadys e 
heaghyn er hoiggal eh. But now, because it is 
not so, he hath visited in his anger; yet he 
knoweth it not in great extremity; Isa. xl. 26: 
…t’eh geamagh orroo ooilley lurg ny enmyn oc, 
lesh mooadys e niart; son t’eh niartal ayns 
pooar; cha vel unnane failleil. …he calleth them 
all by names by the greatness of his might, for 
that he is strong in power; not one faileth, Neh. 
xiii. 22: Cooinee orrym, O my Yee, mychione 
shoh myrgeddin, as ymmyrk lhiam cordail rish 
mooadys dty vyghin. Remember me, O my 
God, concerning this also, and spare me 
according to the greatness of thy mercy.  
yn vooads or vooadys, s. the greatness, 
bulk, size or magnitude. M 
e wooads or wooadys, s. his size, 
greatness, em. M 
mooad* or mooadee, v. enlarge, extend, 
increase magnify, exaggerate; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88.  
vooad, v. [did] enlarge, extend; -agh; -ee; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. M 
mooadaghey, v. enlarging, increasing in 
magnitude, exaggerating. 
dy wooadaghey, v. to enlarge or expand. M 
er vooadagh or vooadaghey, v. hath, &c. 
enlarged, extended, magnified, increased in 
bulk. M 
mooadit, 85. enlarged, extended.  
mooadeyder, s. m. an enlarger, &c. 
mooar, a. big, large, great, vast, &c.  
mooarey, a. pl. big, great, large, enormous, 
239 
M 
 
huge. 
kirree vooarey, a. pl. big sheep. M 
dy mooar, adv. greatly, largely, hugely, 
&c.  
feer vooar, a. very great, large, big, huge. 
M  
feer wooar, a. very big, great, or large. M 
cha mooar lesh, v. he careth not on account 
of size; -yn, id. em.  
 cha mooar lh’ee, adv. she careth not, 
&c.; -ish, id. em.  
 cha mooar lhiam, adv. I care not, &c.; 
-s, id. em. 
 cha by-vooar, adv. careth not, careth 
not because of its bigness, size, or 
greatness; Isa. xxxiii. 8: …t’eh er vrishey yn 
conaant, t’eh er hoiaghey beg jeh ny ard-valjyn, 
cha by-vooar lesh dooinney erbee. …he hath 
broken the covenant, he hath despised the 
cities, he regardeth no man.  
mooar[-]aignagh, a. magnanimous. 
mooar[-]aignys, s. m. magnanimity. 
mooar-leagh, a. precious, valuable; Pro. 
vi. 26: Son liorish drogh-ven ta dooinney 
tayrnit sheese gys boghtynid: as nee ben 
adultrinagh shelg son y vioys mooar-leagh. 
For by means of a whorish woman a man is 
brought to a piece of bread: and the adulteress 
will hunt for the precious life.  
mooar-ooasle, a. great honour, honourable; 
Acts, xxviii. 10: As ren ad myrgeddin 
soiaghey mooar ooasle y yannoo j'in, as tra 
ghow shin lhuingys, laad ad shin lesh dy 
chooilley nhee ymmyrchagh er nyn son. Who 
also honoured us with many honours; and 
when we departed, they laded us with such 
things as were necessary. 
mooar-rheynn, s. m. a province. 
mooar-volgagh, a. big bellied. 
bayrn mooar, s. m. a sea nettle. 
cuishlin-vooar, s. an artery. 
yn feaynid-mooar, s. m. the great 
expansive void without boundary or limit. 
Juan-mooar, s. m. the black -backed gull. 
leagh-mooar, a. precious, valuable. 
scansh-vooar, s. f. importance. 
s’mooar, a. how big, great, large; Luke, i. 
49: Son s’mooar ta’n Ooilley-niartal er 
n’yannoo er my hon, as s’casherick ta e ennym. 
For he that is mighty hath done to me great 
things; and holy is his name. M 
smoo, a. bigger, biggest, greater, greatest, 
larger, largest, more or most, the comp. and 
sup. of mooar. “Eshyn smoo hayrys, smoo 
vees echey.” [He who catches most shall 
have most.] 
chamoo, conj. neither, not either, not more. 
fer-smoo 
yn er-smoo, s. the greatest, mas. F 
scansh-smoo, a. important. 
mooar* or mooaree, v. grudge, envy, 
seeing big or large, too large to be given, or 
another to have; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
vooar or vooaree, v. did grudge or 
begrudge; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 
94. M  
mooaraghey, v. grudging, seeing too great 
for others to enjoy. 
dy wooaraghey, v. to begrudge. M 
er vooaragh or vooaraghey, v. hath, &c., 
grudged, &c. M  
mooarit, 85. grudged. 
s’mooarit, a. how grudged or begrudged. 
M 
mooareyder, s. m. one who grudges. 
yn vooareyder, s. the grudger. M 
mooaralagh, a. haughty, ambitious, 
ostentatious; s. m. a haughty person; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
s’mooaralagh, a. how haughty, &c. M 
s’mooar[a]lee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. 
M 
yn vooaralagh, s. the haughty person. M 
feer vooaralagh, a. very haughty, &c. M  
ro wooaralagh, a. too haughty or 
ambitious. M 
ard-vooaralagh, a. imperious; Ezek. xvi. 
30: Cre cha faase ta dty chree, ta’n Chiarn Jee 
dy ghra, fakin dy vel oo cur-rish ooilley ny 
reddyn shoh, obbyr ben-streebee ard-
vooaralagh! How weak is thine heart, saith the 
Lord God, seeing thou doest all these things, 
the work of an imperious whorish woman. 
mooaralys, s. f. ambition, haughtiness, 
ostentation. 
e vooaralys, s. his haughtiness, &c. M 
e wooaralys, s. his haughtiness or 
ostentation. M  
mooaran or mooarane, s. m. much, many; 
240 
M 
 
the dim. of mooar, a little much. 
e vooarane, s. his much or mickle. M  
moogh, v. quench, extinguish; -agh, 77; -ee; 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
voogh, v. did quench or quenched; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. M 
mooghey, v. quenching, extinguishing. 
dy vooghey, v. to quench. M 
mooghit, 85. quenched, extinct, 
extinguished; Isaiah, xliii. 17: …nee ad lhie 
sheese cooidjagh, as cha n’irree ad arragh: t’ad 
mooghit, t’ad currit ass myr cainle. …they shall 
lie down together, they shall not rise: they are 
extinct, they are quenched as tow. 
s’mooghit, a. how quenched. M 
ro vo[o]ghit, a, too quenched. M 
moogheyder, s. m. a quencher, &c.; pl. 
-yn. 
yn vo[o]gheyder, s. the quencher. M 
mooidjeen, s. m. (from mooie, out, and jeeyn, 
of us) an outlawed or excommunicated. 
person, one out of the pale of the church, a 
miscreant; pl. -yn. 
yn vooidjeen, s. the outcast or miscreant. M 
T[’]ou dty wooidjeen, s. thou art an 
excommunicated person. M 
mooidjeenagh, a. behaving as a miscreant 
or outlawed person. 
feer vooidjeenagh, a. See mooidjeenagh. 
M 
mooidjeenys, s. m. miscreancy; pl. -yn. 
e vooidjeenys, s. his miscreancy. M  
e wooidjeenys, s. his outlawry. M  
mooie 
çheu-mooie, s. m. outside, besides, except; 
Acts, viii. 1: …as v'ad ooilley er nyn skeayley 
magh trooid cheeraghyn Yudea as Samaria, 
cheu mooie jeh ny ostyllyn. …and they were 
all scattered abroad throughout the regions of 
Judaea and Samaria, except the apostles. 
faagit-mooie, 85. Indicted by the petty or 
grand jury. 
oirr-mooie, s. m. outside or edge, outer 
edge. 
laare vooie ‘threshing floor’ B [?] 
mooin [‘back’] 
er e vooin or voin, s. on top of, on his back 
or on him. M 
er mooin y cheilley, adv. on one another, 
mounted on one another, pell mell. 
mooin, v. i. piss, make animal water. 
moon, v. piss, &c.; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
vooin, v. did make urine; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. M 
dy voon, v. to piss. M 
moont, 85. pissed. 
ro vooint, a. too pissed. M 
mooneyder, s. m. one who makes water.  
yn vooineyder, s. the maker of urine. M  
moon, s. m. urine, piss, animal water. 
dy voon, s. of urine. M 
mooiney, a. pl. [?? a. d. of] urine or animal 
water.  
moongoar, s. f. the herb orrage or orrach. 
This is <is> one of the quickest herbs 
known to grow and run to seed.  
mooin 
lus y vooin, s. f. gladwin or stinking 
gladwin. 
mooinjer, s. f. meiny, domestics, servants 
about one, relatives, household; Job, i. 3: 
Va e chooid myrgeddin shiaght thousane 
keyrrey, as three thousaneyn dy chamellyn, as 
queig cheead whing dy ghew, as queig cheead 
assyl bwoirryn, as niart mooinjer; myr shen dy 
row yn dooinney shoh yn er s’berchee jeh 
ooilley deiney’n niar. His substance also was 
seven thousand sheep, and three thousand 
camels, and five hundred yoke of oxen, and 
five hundred she asses, and a very great 
household; so that this man was the greatest of 
all the men of the east. 
yn vooinjer, s. the domestics, the servants, 
the household. M  
e wooinjer, s. his household or domestics. 
M  
fir wooinjer, s. men-servants. M  
mooinjerey, a. d. of a relation, servant, &c.  
ben wooinjerey, s. a woman relation. M 
ben-vooinjerey, s. f. a kinswoman. 
fer-mooinjerey, s. m. a man-servant. 
fir vooinjerey, s. men servants. M  
mooinjer-veggey, s. pl. little ones about 
one.  
ard-wooinjer, s. m. principal ones. 
mooinjerys, s. m. relationship, alliance, the 
241 
M 
 
state of being related.  
e vooinjerys, s. his relationship, &c. M 
e wooinjerys, s. his relationship. M 
mooir or muir, s. f. (mare, Latin) main, the 
sea; Eccl. i. 7: Ta ooilley ny awinyn roie gys 
y vooir, ny-yeih cha vel y mooir lhieeney 
harrish: gys moir ny awinyn t’ad reesht 
chyndaa. All the rivers run into the sea; yet the 
sea is not full; unto the place from whence the 
rivers come, thither they return again.  
yn vooir, s. the sea; Eccl. i. 7. M 
yn wooir, s. the sea. M  
yn vuir, s. the sea. See also vooir. M  
yn wuir. See wooir, the sea. M  
mooir-hraie, s. f. the ebb tide, low water. 
yn vuirhraie, s. the ebb tide. M 
mooir lhieeney, s. m. the flowing of the 
sea, the flood tide. 
marrey, a. d. of the main or sea. 
baare varrey, a. d. on the surface of the 
sea. M 
ben-varrey, s. f. a mermaid. 
briw-marrey, s. m. a water bailiff. 
fannag-varrey, s. f. a cormorant. See also 
shag. 
goblan-marrey, s. [m.] a red-shank. 
lane marrey, s. m. high water. 
lane marrey traie, s. turned on the ebb. 
sidoor marrey, s. m. a marine. 
traie-varrey, s. f. low-water. 
yn tidey-varrey, (the sea tide) 
mooirçhoor, s. m. a wreck; pl. -aghyn. 
e vuirçhooraghyn, s. his wrecks. M 
mooirçhoor, v. -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
 mooirçhoorey, v. wrecking. 
 mooirçhooreyder, s. m. a wrecker; pl. 
-yn. 
 mooirçhoorit, 85. wrecked. 
mooireerey, s. f. a billow; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn]; billows, the rising of the 
sea by wind, the motion made on standing 
corn by wind.  
yn vuireirey, s. the billow. M 
moo[i]rjeenagh, a. murky, dark, gloomy, 
of a sea colour, cloudy, looking for rain, 
watery. 
 feer vuirjeenagh, s. very gloomy. M  
 mooirjeenys, s. f. appearance for rain, 
cloudiness, lowering, gloominess. 
 e vuirjeenys, s. his gloominess. M 
mooirlaig, s. f. a sea worn stone. 
yn vuirlaig, s. the stone worn by the sea. 
M 
mooirlane, s. f. an edible sea tang. 
yn vuirlane, s. the sea tang. M 
moost, v. rouse, hastily or suddenly starting 
out of a quiet posture; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
voost, v. did rouse, sally or rush; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms, 94. M  
moostey, v.  
er voostey, v. hath, &c., roused, &c. M  
moostit, 85. roused, bustled. 
moostey, s. m. a sudden rouse or spring 
from sleep or a quiet posture; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn]. 
moosteyder, s. m. a rouser; pl. -yn. 
moosteyr 
yn voosteyr, s. the rouser. M  
mooyll, s. f. a mull, a cape; pl. -yn. 
yn voil, s. the mull. M 
moughane, s. m. a cough; pl. -yn. 
moughaneagh, a. having a cough. 
s’moughanagh, a. how much coughing. M 
s’moughanee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. 
moughaney, v. coughing. 
mow, <v.> [a.] waste, decayed, destroyed.  
s’mow, a. how wasted or decayed. M  
s’mowey, a. id., comp. and sup. M 
cur mow or coyrt mow, v. wasting, 
decaying, destroying, consuming; Deu. ix. 
3: Toig er-y-fa shen, yn laa jiu, dy nee yn 
Chiarn dty Yee eh ta goll royd myr aile ta coyrt 
mow: nee eh ad y stroie, as nyn lhieggal 
kiongoyrt rhyt. Understand therefore this day, 
that the Lord thy God is he which goeth over 
before thee; as a consuming fire he shall 
destroy them, and he shall bring them down 
before thy face.  
toyrt-mow, s. f. destruction, damnation, 
desolation; Zep. i. 15: Ta’n laa shen, laa dy 
yymmoose, laa dy hrimshey, as dy arkys, laa 
dy hraartys as toyrt-mow, laa dy ghorraghys 
as dy ghrooid, laa dy vodjallyn as dorraghys 
dullyr. That day is a day of wrath, a day of 
trouble and distress, a day of wasteness and 
242 
M 
 
desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, 
a day of clouds and thick darkness. 
moyl 
lus ny moyl Moirrey, s. f. marsh mallows.  
lus ny moal Moirrey, s. f. common 
mallows. 
moyll, v. praise, applaud; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
Prov. “Moyll y laa mie fastyr”. [Praise a 
good day in the evening.] 
moyll y Çhiarn, in. hallelujah. 
voyll, v. did praise; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. M  
moylley 
dy voylley, v. to praise, to applaud. M  
dy ard-voylley, v. to magnify, to extol. 
moyllit, 85. praised, applauded. 
s’moyllit, a. how praised. M 
ro voyllit, a. too praised. M 
moylley, s. f. praise, applause, &c.  
 moyllee, a. d. of praise or applause. 
 fir voyllee, p. praisers, applauders. M  
 dooinney-moyllee, s. m. an applauder, a 
praiser. 
 moylley charane, a corruption, no 
doubt, of moylley Hiarn (praise to the 
Lord).  
 moylley Chreest, praise to Christ.  
 moylley rea or ree, praise to the King. 
 moylley Vartyn, praise to St. Martin. 
 moylley Voirrey, praise to St. Mary.  
 moylley Vreeshey, praise to St. 
Bridget.  
 cur-volley [da], <d. a.> giving him 
gladness; Jer. xx. 15: Dy doogh dy row da’n 
dooinney hug lesh y naight da my ayr, gra, Ta 
lhiannoo mac er ny ruggey dhyt; cur-volley da. 
Cursed be the man who brought tidings to my 
father, saying, A man child is born unto thee; 
making him very glad. 
 jeh-voylley, p. dispraise, censure, 
dishonour. 
 meevoylley, s. m. dispraise. 
moylleyder, s. m. a praiser, an applauder. 
yn voylleyder, s. the praiser. M 
moyrn, s. f. pride, haughtiness. Prov. “Yiow 
moyrn lhieggey” [Pride will have a fall] 
and “Cha vel eh çheet jesh da moyrn, 
dayannoo red erbee ta laccal leshtal” [It 
does not become pride to do anything 
which needs an excuse]. 
yn voyrn, s. the pride. Prov. “Cha dennee 
rieau yn voyrn feayraght” [Pride never felt 
the cold]. M 
moyrnagh, a. proud, haughty; s. m. a proud 
person; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]. 
s’moyrnagh, a. how proud. M 
s’moyrnee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. M 
feer voyrnagh, a. very proud. M 
e voyrnee, s. his proud ones. M 
mrastyr, s. m. an evening meal. Some think 
this to be the old Manks of dinner. 
mrastyr-beg, s. m. a luncheon in the 
evening. 
muc or muck, s. f. a pig, hog, swine; pl. -yn. 
yn vuck, s. the pig or hog. Prov. “Lhig dy 
chooilley vuck reuyrey jee hene” [Let every 
pig dig for herself]. 
muickey, or muigey, a. d. of swine or pigs. 
 ark[-]vuickey, s. f. a young pig. 
muck-awin, s. f. a bear. 
yn vuck-awin, s. the bear. M 
muck-arkagh 
yn vuck-arkagh, s. the sow. M 
bee-muck, s. f. the herb sowthistle; by 
some called bainney-muck because when 
broken or cut it exudes a milky juice. 
curtlagh-vuck, s. f. herb bur-reed. 
onnane-vuck, s. f. the sow-thistle. 
sharmane-vuck, s. f. sow thistle. See also 
onnane meein. 
muckagh, a. hoggish. 
mucklagh, s. m. a hogsty or pigsty. 
yn vucklagh, s. the pigsty. M 
muinney, s. m. mesentery; it is called inwards 
in the English Bible; Lev. iii. 9: …yn eeh 
echey, as yn slane curpin shen nee eh ’ghoaill 
jeh rish y chraue drommey: as yn eeh ta 
coodaghey yn mynnagh, as ooilley’n muinney. 
…the fat thereof, and the whole rump, it shall 
he take off hard by the backbone; and the fat 
that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is 
upon the inwards; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
yn vuinney, s. the mesentery. B 
mullag, s. f. a cask, a keg; pl. -yn. 
yn vullag, s. the cask or keg. M 
beeal-mullag, s. m. bung-hole of a cask. 
243 
M 
 
mullagh, s. top, summit; pl. 72 [change -agh 
to -eeyn]. 
yn vullagh, s. the top,the summit, the 
height; as, vel yn eayst ec y vullagh (is the 
moon at the height or full) ? M 
goll er mullagh ching, v. going at short 
notice, in a hurry or bustle. 
er-y-vullagh, adv. atop, on the top. 
mullee, a. d. of the top or summit. 
e vullee, a. d. his top or head; Acts, i. 18: 
Nish ren y dooinney shoh magher y 
chionnaghey lesh y leagh dy vee-chairys; as 
tuittym gour e vullee, skeilt eh veih-my cheilley 
ayns y vean, as roie ooilley e vynnagh ass. 
Now this man purchased a field with the reward 
of iniquity; and falling headlong, he burst 
asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed 
out; pl. -yn; his eminences. M 
mummig, s. f. the familiar of mother; 
appellations for grandmother on the 
mother’s side in the Manks are, mummig 
my vummig, ben my yisick wooar, as my 
warree. 
dty vummig, s. thy mother, colloquially. M 
e ummug, s. his mother. M  
liass ummug, s. f. a step mother. 
murlhin, s. f. a hamper; pl. 72 [change -in to 
-eeyn].  
yn vurlhin, s. the hamper. M 
murran, s. m. a plague or contagious 
distemper. 
murtaghey, v. bungling, fumbling.  
musthaa, s. m. a blunder, an uproar, a tumult. 
It may also be the Manks of muster; pl. -yn.  
yn vustaa or vusthaa, s. the bustle. M 
musthane, s. spunk, rotten wood turned to 
dust. 
yn vusthane, s. the dust of rotten wood. M 
mwaagh, s. m. a hare. Prov. “Furree yn 
mwaagh rish e heshey.” [The hare will wait 
for his mate.] 
e waagh, s. his hare. M 
mwaaee, s. pl. hares.  
e waaee, s. his hares. M 
mwane, s. f. the embryo of an egg in fowls, 
&c., the fetus of any other animal in the 
womb; Job, iii. 16: Er-nonney follit myr 
ymmyrkey roish y traa cha beign ayn; myr 
mwaneyn nagh vaik rieau y toilshey. Or as an 
hidden untimely birth I had not been; as infants 
which never saw light; pl. -yn.  
mwannal s. m. the neck, the nape, the collar 
or cape; as in Job, xxx. 18: Liorish bree 
trome my ghoghan ta my choamrey er ny 
chaghlaa: te lhiantyn hym cha chion as 
mwannal my chooat. By the great force of my 
disease is my garment changed: it bindeth me 
about as the collar of my coat.  
e wannal, s. his neck. M  
mwannal cass, s. f. the small of the leg. 
mwannal cooat, s. m. the cape of a coat, 
&c. 
mwannal laue, s. f. the wrist, pl. 
mwannallyn laue. 
mwannallys, s. m. the act of having the 
arm round the neck; being in close contact 
or dispute. 
mwannallagh, a. d. of the neck or necks. 
 ard-wannalagh, a. stiff-necked. 
 creoi wannallagh, a. stiff-necked; s. 
stiff-necked person. M  
 creoï-wannallagh, a. stiff-necked. 
creoi wannallys, s. stiff-neckedness, 
stubbornness. M  
mwarree, s. f. a grandmother; pl. -yn. 
e warree, s. his grandmother. M  
mwashag, s. f. a wig, a bunch of hair, a 
blowze; pl. -yn. 
yn washag, s. the wig or tuft of hair. M 
mwatlag, s. f. a large sea snail, a wilk or walk 
[i.e. whelk]; pl. -yn. 
e watlag, s. his wilk or walk. M  
mwing, s. f. a mane; pl. -yn. 
yn wing, s. the mane. M 
mwing-jeear, s. m. a horse halter; pl. -yn. 
mwyllin, s. a mill or miln.  
yn wyllin, s. the mill or miln. M  
mwyljyn, s. pl. mills. 
e wyljyn, s. his mills. M 
mwyljey, a. d. of a mill or mills. 
wyljey, a. d. of a mill or mills. M  
mwyllinagh 
wyllinagh, a. d. of a mill or mills. M  
mwyllin arroo, s. f. a corn mill.  
mwyllin fasnee, s. f. a winnowing machine.  
244 
M 
 
mwyllin geayee, s. f. a wind mill.  
mwyllin laare, s. f. a floor mill.  
mwyllin laue, s. f. a hand mill.  
mwyllin lieen, s. f. a flax mill.  
mwyllin ushtey, s. f. a water mill.  
mwyllin walkee, s. f. a tuck mill. 
clagh-wyllin, s. a millstone. 
mwyllar, s. m. a miller; pl. -yn. 
yn wyllar, s. the miller. M  
 mwyllaragh, a. d. of a miller. 
 wyllaragh, a. d. of or belonging to a 
miller. 
 mwyllarys 
 e wyllarys, s. his millership or his trade or 
craft of a miller. M 
my, conj. if, suppose that, allow that. 
my-lioar, adv. could hardly. 
my ren, v. if did, if done. 
my she shen, adv. if it be, if that should. 
my ta dy gha, adv. if is or not, if it is or 
not. 
my va dy gha, adv. if it were or not. 
my veggan lhiat, adv. if too little for thee, 
or if thou thought too little. 
my, pre. before; Gen. l. 16. My dooar eh 
baase (before he died): As hug ad chaghteryn 
gys Joseph, gra, Hug dt’ayr sarey my dooar eh 
baase, gra… And they sent a messenger unto 
Joseph, saying, Thy father did command before 
he died, saying…. 
my voym baase, adv. before I die. 
my, pro. my, mine, me. It is always sounded 
mhe or mey.  
m’, pro. a contraction of my before a word 
beginning with a vowel; as, m’olt (my hair) 
my-laue, pro. s. my hand. 
my-lieh, adv. my behalf; Deu. xxxi. 19: 
Shen-y-fa nish, scrieu-jee yn arrane moyllee 
shoh diu hene, as ynsee-jee eh da cloan Israel: 
dy vod eh ve oc dy ghoaill, as dy vod yn arrane 
shoh ve son feanish my-lieh noi cloan Israel. 
Now therefore write ye this song for you, and 
teach it the children of Israel: put it in their 
mouths, that this song may be a witness for me 
against the children of Israel.  
my-lomarcan, pro. a. I alone; Job, i. 16: Ta 
aile Yee er duittym veih niau, as er lostey 
seose ny kirree, as ny sharvaantyn, as er stroie 
ad, as ta mish my-lomarcan er scapail dy insh 
dhyt. The fire of God is fallen from heaven, and 
hath burned up the sheep, and the servants, 
and consumed them; and I only am escaped 
alone to tell thee. 
my lurg, p. p. after me; -s, id. em. 
my-yeï, adv. p. after me. 
m’y, adv. pro. that and me (a contraction of 
y in dy (that), and m in mee (me); Rom. vii. 
11: Son peccah goaill vondeish liorish yn 
anney, ren m’y volley, as liorish ren eh m’y 
varroo. For sin, taking occasion by the 
commandment, deceived me, and by it slew 
me. 
my, prep. [cf. mysh] 
my-cheilley, a. continuous, together. 
my-chione, p. p. about, concerning; of 
who, of whom; -eshyn, id. em.  
 my-e-chione, p. p. about him, of him, 
concerning him; <John, x. 36> [see below].  
 my-y-chione, p. p. of which, about 
which 
 my-chionesyn, p. p. about him, em. See 
also mychione-eshyn; [John, x. 36: Vel shiu 
gra mychionesyn ta’n Ayr er chasherickey, as 
er choyrt gys y theihll, T’ou loayrt goan-
mollaghtagh; er-yn-oyr dy dooyrt mee, She Mac 
Yee mee? Say ye of him, whom the Father 
hath sanctified, and sent into the world, Thou 
blasphemest; because I said, I am the Son of 
God? Isa. xxix. 16: Dy firrinagh bee shoh yn 
camlaagys euish er ny choontey myr cray yn 
phasheyder: son jean yn obbyr gra mychione-
syn ren eh, Cha ren eshyn mee? Surely your 
turning of things upside down shall be 
esteemed as the potter’s clay: for shall the work 
say of him that made it, He made me not?] 
 my-chione eck, p. p. about her, 
concerning her; -ish, id. em. 
 my ny gione, p. p. about them, about 
whom; -s, id. em; <Jud. vi. 1[3]> [see 
below]:  
 my nyn gione, p. p. about them; -s, id. 
em; Jud. vi. 1[3]: …cre ta er jeet jeh ooilley e 
virrilyn my-nyn-gione dinsh nyn ayraghyn 
dooin? …where be all his miracles which our 
fathers told us of? 
 my-chione oc, p. p. about them, &c.; 
-syn, id. em.  
 my my chione, p. p. about me, 
245 
M 
 
concerning me; -s, id. em. 
 my-dty chione, p. p. about thee, 
concerning thee; 1 Sam. xix. 3: As hem’s 
magh as shassym liorish my ayr ’sy vagher 
raad t’ou follit, as loayr-ym rish m’ayr my-dty-
chione; as cre-erbee yioym magh insh-ym 
dhyt. And I will go out and stand beside my 
father in the field where thou art, and I will 
commune with my father of thee; and what I 
see, that I will tell thee. -s, id. em.  
my-choau, adv. in chaff. 
my-chour, p. p. for me provided for me.  
mygeayrt, pre. about, concerning.  
 mygeayrt y mysh, p. p. about him; -in. 
id. em. 
 mygeayrt y mo’ee, p. p. about her; -ish, 
id. em.  
 mygeayrt y moo, p. p. about them; 
-syn. id. em. 
 mygeayrt y moom, p. p. about me; -ys, 
id. em. 
 mygeayrt y mooin, p. p. about us; -yn, 
id. em. 
 mygeayrt y mood, p. p. about thee; -s. 
id. em. 
 mygeayrt y miu, p. p. about you or ye; 
-ish, id. em.  
my-heear, a. westward, to the west. 
my-hiar, a. eastward, to the east. 
my-hwoaie, a. northward, to the north.  
my-laue, after çheet it is an adv. going on, 
coming on, going forward, getting better in 
health or circumstances.  
my[-]laee, a. with the descent, drooping. 
myleeaney, s. f. this year. 
my-lesh, v. belonging, owning. 
my-lhieu, pro. pl. the owners. 
my[-]neealloo, a. fainted, fell in a trance or 
swooned; Dan. viii. 27: As huitt mish Daniel 
my-neealloo, as va mee ching son earish: lurg 
shen hrog mee orrym, as hie mee mysh 
cooishyn y ree. And I Daniel fainted, and was 
sick certain days; afterward I rose up, and did 
the king’s business; and I was astonished at 
the vision, but none understood it. 
my-ner, in. behold; as, ver oo my-ner.  
my-niessey, adv. next to, by, nearest to; 
Num. ii. 20: As my-niessey dasyn vees tribe 
Vanasseh: as captan cloan Vanasseh, vees 
Gamaliel mac Pedahzur. And by him shall be 
the tribe of Manasseh: and the captain of the 
children of Manasseh shall be Gamaliel the son 
of Pedahzur.  
my-rass, a. bolled, in seed. 
my vlaa, a. in flower. 
my-yeish, a. in ear, out of the blade. 
my yiass, adv. southward, to the south.  
myghin, s. f. mercy; pl. -yn. 
e vyghin, s. his mercy. M  
ard-vyghin, s. m. great mercy; pl. -yn. 
myghinagh, a. merciful, clement; s. m. a 
merciful person; pl. 71 [change -agh to 
-ee].  
s’myghinagh, a. how merciful. M 
s’myghinee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. M 
feer vyghinagh, a. very merciful. M 
dy vyghinee, s. of merciful ones. M 
neu-vyghinagh, a. unmerciful, inclement. 
myghinid or myghinys, s. f. mercifulness. 
e vyghinid, s. his mercifulness. M 
myn, a. small, fine, as flour, &c. 
s’myn, a. how small or fine. M  
s’myney, a. id., comp. and sup. M 
myney, a. pl. small, fine, &c. 
feer vyn, [a]. very fine, small, &c. M  
mynaghey, v. mincing, making small.  
dy vynaghey, v. to make small, &c. M 
myn-chyrl, s. pl. little cares or ones. 
myneash, s. m. minority. 
mynlagh, s. m. the fine of meal or flour. 
mynney, s. m. a double curse, a great oath.  
mollaght-mynney, s. m. an execration, a 
curse of curses, a double curse; Jer. xlii. 18: 
…as bee shiu son ard-vollaght, as son atchim, 
as son mollaght-mynney, as son oltooan, as 
cha vaik shiu yn ynnyd shoh arragh. …and ye 
shall be an execration, and an astonishment, 
and a curse, and a reproach; and ye shall see 
this place no more; and Jer. xliv. 12: …yiow 
ad ooilley baase, beg as mooar, lesh y chliwe 
as y ghortey: as bee ad son ard-vollaght, as 
son atchim, as son mollaght-mynney, as son 
oltooan. …they shall die, from the least even 
unto the greatest, by the sword and by the 
famine: and they shall be an execration, and an 
astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach. 
myngyr, v. i. pilfer, steal small things; -agh, 
77, &c. 
vyngyr, v. did pilfer or steal small things; 
246 
M 
 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. M 
myngyraght, v. pilfering, picking and 
stealing, stealing small things. 
dy vyngyraght, v. to pilfer or steal petty 
things. M 
mynjeig, s. f. a package; pl. -yn. 
yn vynjeig, s. the small package. M 
mynthey, s. f. mint; Luke, xi. 42: Agh smerg 
diuish Phariseeyn: son ta shiu jagheenys 
mynthey, rue, as dy chooilley horch dy 
lossreeyn, agh s’beg ta shiu soiaghey jeh 
briwnys as graih Yee: ad shoh lhisagh shiu v’er 
n’yannoo, gyn faagail y chooid elley gyn 
jannoo. But woe unto you, Pharisees! for ye 
tithe mint and rue and all manner of herbs, and 
pass over judgment and the love of God: these 
ought ye to have done, and not to leave the 
other undone. 
yn vhyntey, s. the herb mint. M 
myr, conj. as, like. 
myr-chaagh, adv. withal, along with; 2 
Sam. x[i]. 17: As vrish deiney'n ard-valley 
magh, as ren ad caggey rish Joab: as huitt 
paart jeh deiney Ghavid; as hooar Uriah yn 
Hittite e vaase myr-chaagh. And the men of 
the city went out, and fought with Joab: and 
there fell some of the people of the servants of 
David; and Uriah the Hittite died also. 
myr dy beagh, adv. as it were. 
myrgeddin, adv. also, likewise, in like 
manner. 
myr-haynt, adv. covetously. 
myr ragh, adv. as not. 
myrragh, adv. as like, as would, as were. 
myr shen, adv. as that, in that manner. 
myr shoh, adv. thus, as this. 
myr te, adv. as it is.  
myr teh, adv. as he is. 
myr va, adv. as was. 
myr ve, adv. as before, as it was, as it were; 
statu quo.  
myr v’eh, c. p. as he was. 
myr veagh, adv. as would be. 
myr vou tou, c. p. as thou wert, so thou art. 
myr-yein, a. as it were real, in a pretended 
manner, sham. Prov. “Cadley ny moddee 
tra ta ny mraane creearey.” [The dogs 
sleep while the women sift. (The proverb 
does not illustrate myr-yein, and seems to 
be misplaced.)] 
mysh: p. p. about, about him; -in, id. em.  
moo’ee, p. p. about her, about her body; 
-ish, id. em. 
mo’ee, p. p. on her or about her; -ish, id. 
em.  
m’ee, p. p. about her; -ish, id. em. 
mimbee, p. p. about her; -ish, id. em.  
mumboo, p. p. about them; -syn, id. em. 
See also moo.  
moo, p. p. about them; -syn, id. em. 
moom, p. p. about me; -s, id. em.  
mooin or muin, p. p. about us, or mounted 
on us; -yn, id. em. 
mood, p. p. about thy body, about thee.  
 cur mood, p. dress; Acts, x[i]i. 8: As 
dooyrt yn ainle rish, Cur dty chryss ort, as 
kiangle ort dty vraagyn: As ren eh shen. As 
dooyrt eh rish, Cur mood dty gharmad, as eiyr 
orrym’s. And the angel said unto him, Gird 
thyself, and bind on thy sandals. And so he did. 
And he saith unto him, Cast thy garment about 
thee, and follow me. -s, id. em. 
miu, p. p. about you or ye; -ish, id. em. 
myskid or myskit, s. m. malice, hatred. 
e vyskid or vyskit, s. his malice or spite, M  
myskidagh, a. malicious; Ez. xxv. 15: Er-
yn-oyr dy vel ny Philistinee er ghellal dy 
elgyssagh, as er ghoaill cooilleeney lesh cree 
myskidagh, dy stroie Judah, ayns nyn shenn 
noidys. Because the Philistines have dealt by 
revenge, and have taken vengeance with a 
despiteful heart, to destroy it for the old hatred. 
feer vysgidagh, a. very malicious or 
spiteful. M 
247 
N 
 
N 
This letter is one of the immutables, and does 
not change; words primarily initialled by 
vowels come under it, and some from f, g, s, 
&c. as shown. The reader is not to expect the 
whole of the branch words or derivatives, but 
as many of them will appear as may show 
how the changes are effected. The 
changelings from f to n all change to v in 
sacred or solemn discourse or writing.  
na, adv. than.  
naar or naaree, v. shame, disgrace; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
naaraghey, v. shameing.  
naarit, pt. shamed.  
nearey, s. f. shame, bashfulness.  
er-nearey, a. ashamed, for shame. 
naarey, s. f. shame. See nearey.  
naareydagh, a. shameful, bashful.  
naarildagh, a. bashful.  
s’naareydagh or s’naarildagh, a. how 
much ashamed. N 
s’naareydee or s’naarildee, a. id., comp. 
and sup. N 
naareyder, s. m. one who shames; pl. -yn. 
naardey, a. waste, decayed, abolished.  
s’naardey, a. how reduced to nothing, how 
decayed or annihilated. N 
naboo, s. m. a neighbour; pl. -yn.  
nabooagh, a neighbourly.  
naboonys or nabooys, s. m. 
neighbourhood.  
naggyr, a. out of use; above what is wanted; 
idle; neglected.  
nagh, adv. not. There are two words in the 
Manks for not; this for interrogating and 
commanding negatively; the other word 
(cha), is for answering negatively or 
denying. Ny is often used instead of this 
word, but I think improperly; as, in Jer. 
xliii. 2, “Ny gow sheese gys Egypt,” and in. 
2 Kings, ii. 18, “Ny gow Jee,” which ought 
to have been nagh.  
nagh lhig y Jee, in. let not God or God 
forbid !  
nagh vod ve, adv. cannot be, impossible.  
naight, s. m. news, narrative, narration, tale.  
bee naight, s. m. a novelty in meat, some 
new or delicate meat to eat, a dainty. 
naigheagh, a. giving to tell news or tales.  
naim, s. m. uncle, the father or mother's 
brother; 2 Kings, xxiv. 17: As ren ree 
Vabylon Mattaniah naim Jehoiachin ree ny 
ynnyd, as chaghlaa eh yn ennym echey gys 
Zedekiah. And the king of Babylon made 
Mattaniah his father's brother king in his stead, 
and changed his name to Zedekiah; Lev. xxv. 
49: Foddee e naim, ny mac e naim eshyn y 
easley, ny fer erbee jeh e chynney; ny my ta 
fort echey, foddee eh feaysley eh hene. Either 
his uncle, or his uncle's son, may redeem him, 
or any that is nigh of kin unto him of his family 
may redeem him; or if he be able, he may 
redeem himself; pl. -yn.  
naisht, v. [espouse, bargain to marry] -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87;-ys, 88.  
naishtey, v. bargaining in marriage.  
er nastey or naistey, v. hath, &c. espoused, 
&c.; Hos. ii. 19: As nee'm oo y nastey rhym 
pene son dy bragh, dy jarroo nasht-ym oo 
rhym pene ayns cairys, as ayns briwnys, as 
ayns kenjallys-ghraihagh, as ayns myghinyn. 
And I will betroth thee unto me for ever; yea, I 
will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and 
in judgment, and in lovingkindness, and in 
mercies.  
naishtee, a. d. of espousals, or 
matrimonial.  
nastee, a. d. of espousals.  
bargane nashtee, s. m. a matrimonial 
contract. 
naisht, pt. espoused, promised in marriage, 
bargained to marry;  
nasht. See naisht. 
naishtit, pt. See naisht. 
napin, s. m. a turnip; pl. -yn.  
nar, adv. no, nor, or never; Mark, xi. 14: As 
dreggyr Yeesey, as dooyrt eh rish, Nar ee 
dooinney erbee mess jeeds veih shoh magh er 
son dy bragh. As cheayll e ostyllyn eh. And 
Jesus answered and said unto it, No man eat 
fruit of thee hereafter for ever. And his disciples 
heard it.  
narra noain dhyt, adv. may it not 
248 
N 
 
otherwise be known to thee, or may it 
inevitably, of necessity, or fate come on or 
to thee. [= Nara noain dhyt, Nara'n yioin 
dhyt, Nar row noauyn dhyt.] 
nastee, adv. gratis, for nothing, nought; Job, 
i. 9: Eisht dreggyr Satan y Chiarn, Vel Job 
goaill aggle roish Jee nastee? Then Satan 
answered the Lord, and said, Doth Job fear 
God for nought?  
nasteeagh, adv. gratuitously.  
nastey-Nollick, s. m. a Christmas box, a 
gift given at Christmas, a gratuity.  
naue 
sheelnaue, s. mankind, human beings. This 
word no doubt is from sheel (seed) as in 
Job, xxi. 8: T'ad fakin yn sheel oc bishaghey 
mâroo, as nyn sluight kiongoyrt rish nyn 
sooillyn. Their seed is established in their sight 
with them, and their offspring before their eyes; 
and naue a corruption of niau (heaven), the 
seed or offspring of heaven. 
naunt, s. f. an aunt; Lev. xviii. 14: Cha jean oo 
roostey nearey braar dt'ayrey, cha jig uss er-
gerrey da'n ven echey: dty naunt ee. Thou 
shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's 
brother, thou shalt not approach to his wife: she 
is thine aunt.  
nay, adv. nay; 1 Chron. xxi. 24: As dooyrt ree 
David rish Oman, Nay agh son shickyrys 
kionnee-yms eh ec y slane price: son cha goym 
shen ny ta lhiat's da'n Chiarn, ny oural-losht y 
hebbal nastee. And king David said to Ornan, 
Nay; but I will verily buy it for the full price: for I 
will not take that which is thine for the Lord, nor 
offer burnt offerings without cost.  
neayr, pre. since, so long since, ago; Mark, 
ix. 21: As denee eh jeh'n ayr echey, Caid 
neayr as haink shoh er? As dooyrt eh, T'eh er 
ve myr shoh neayr as v'eh ny lhiannoo. And he 
asked his father, How long is it ago since this 
came unto him? And he said, Of a child; -ys, 
id. em. 
neeal or neealloo, v. swoon or faint.  
tuittym neeal, v. falling lifeless; [L]am. ii. 
11: Ta my hooillyn moal lesh jeïr; ta my chree 
seaghnit, ta my aane er ny gheayrtey magh er 
y thalloo, er coontey toyrt-mow inneen my 
phobble, er-yn-oyr dy vel yn chloan as ny 
oikanyn tuittym neeal ayns straïdyn yn ard-
valley. Mine eyes do fail with tears, my bowels 
are troubled, my liver is poured upon the earth, 
for the destruction of the daughter of my 
people; because the children and the sucklings 
swoon in the streets of the city; swooning or 
fainting. 
my[-]neealloo, a. fainted, fell in a trance or 
swooned; Dan. viii. 27: As huitt mish Daniel 
my-neealloo, as va mee ching son earish. And 
I Daniel fainted, and was sick certain days. 
neeal, s. m. aspect, countenance.  
neal. Though this word is in Joel ii. 6: 
Kiongoyrt roo bee sleih dy mooar seaghnit, bee 
neal dy ghorraghys er dy chooilley eddin. 
Before their face the people shall be much 
pained: all faces shall gather blackness; it 
ought to be written neeal, which see.  
nealeraght, v. changing countenance or 
aspect.  
neeu, a. reduced to want, undone; Job, xviii. 
12: Nee'n niart echey goll neeu, as bee toyrt-
mow chion ec e lhiattee. His strength shall be 
hungerbitten, and destruction shall be ready at 
his side. Pro. vi. 30: Cha vel deiney jeeaghyn 
er loght y vaarliagh dy ve wheesh, my t'eh geid 
dy yannoo magh e egin, tra t'eh goll neeu. Men 
do not despise a thief, if he steal to satisfy his 
soul when he is hungry; and Isa. viii. 21: As 
hed ad trooid y cheer ayns chennid ghyere, as 
gortey: as hig eh gy-kione, tra vees ad roit 
neeu lesh accyrys, dy bee ad ayns lheid yn 
angaish dy jean ad gwee mollaght er nyn ree 
as nyn Yee, as jeeaghyn seose. And they shall 
pass through it, hardly bestead and hungry: 
and it shall come to pass, that when they shall 
be hungry, they shall fret themselves, and 
curse their king and their God, and look 
upward. See neunhee.  
nep, s. f. the herb hoar-hound.  
ner 
cur-my-ner, in. behold, see, lo; cur-jee-my-
ner (behold ye). 
my-ner, in. behold; as, ver oo my-ner. 
neu[-], an adjunct, un[-], in[-], dis[-], im[-], 
ir[-], &c. and of the same meaning with 
am[-], an[-], mee[-], &c.  
neu-aalin a. inelegant, uncomely.  
249 
N 
 
neu-aarloo 
s’neu-aarloo, a. how unprepared. It may 
be well here to remark that the s’ may be 
placed before all the adjectives, having 
neu before them, and for abridgement I 
have inserted only a few, as [in what 
follows]. 
neu-aash, s. f. uneasiness, discontent.  
neu-aashagh, uneasy, not easy.  
neu-aasid, s. m. disquiet, 
discontentedness, difficulty.  
neu-abyl, a. unable, impossible.  
neu-aggindagh, or neu-agginagh, a. 
undesirable, unminded for, averse.  
neu-aggindys, s. f. undesirableness.  
neu-aghtal, a. unskilful, awkward.  
neu-aghtallys, s. f. unskillfulness, &c.  
neu-ainjyssagh, a. unacquainted.  
neu-ammyssagh, [a]. undutiful<ness>; s. 
m. an undutiful person; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee].  
neu-appee, a. immature, unripe.  
neu-arryltagh, a. unwilling, involuntary.  
neu-arryltys, s. f. unwillingness, 
reluctance.  
neu-atchimit, a. unawed.  
neu-chadjin, a. uncommon, rare; Dan. ii. 
11: As te red neu-chadjin ta'n ree dy hirrey, 
as cha vel fer erbee elley oddys soilshaghey 
shoh fenish y ree, er-lhimmey jeh ny 
flaunyssee hene, nagh vel y cummal oc 
marish deiney. And it is a rare thing that the 
king requireth, and there is none other that 
can shew it before the king, except the gods, 
whose dwelling is not with flesh. 
neu-chaghlaaee, a. unchangeable, 
invariable, immutable.  
neu-çhaglit, a. 5. ungathered. [?l. neu-
haglit] 
neu-chaglit, a. 6. unbounded, unlimited.  
neu-chairagh a. unjust, unrighteous, 
unfair.  
neu-chasley, a. different, unlike.  
neu-chaslys, s. f. difference, unlikeness.  
neu-cheeayllagh, a. unwary unwittingly.  
neu-chenjal, a. unkind, not kindly.  
neu-chiarailagh, a. uncareful, careless.  
neu-chiart, a. uneven, not level, dissimilar.  
s’neu-chiart, a. how uneven, &c. N 
neu-chiartys, s. f. unevenness, partiality, 
inaccuracy.  
neu-chinjagh, a. irregular, inconsistent, 
unsteady.  
neu-chooie, 4. unfit, incapable, inordinate, 
indecent; Col. iii. 5: Smaghtee-jee er-y-fa 
shen ny oltyn thallooinagh eu, maarderys, 
neu-ghlennid, yeearree neu-chooie, drogh 
vian, as saynt seihltagh, ta dy chur ammys 
da jallooyn: Mortify therefore your members 
which are upon the earth; fornication, 
uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil 
concupiscence, and covetousness, which is 
idolatry.  
neu-chorrym, a. unequal, disproportionate.  
neu-chorrymid, s. m. inequality, 
partiality.  
neu-chorrymit, a. unequalled, 
unparalleled.  
neu-chreen, a. unripe, unwithered.  
neu-chreeney, a. unwise, simple.  
neu-chummaltit, pt. uninhabited.  
neu-chyndagh, a. 6. unblamable, free from 
crime; s. m. a blameless, person.  
neu-enit or neu-fenit, pt. unasked, 
unsolicited.  
neu-ennaghtagh, a. unfeeling, insensible.  
neu-erreeishagh, a. incompassionate; s. m. 
a person void of compassion; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
neu-feagh, a. unquiet, restless.  
neu-feaghid, s. m. disquietude.  
neu-feeu, a. unworthy, wanting merit, 
mean, inadequate, defective.  
s’neu-feeu a. how unworthy. N 
neu-feeuid, s. m. unworthiness, 
worthlessness, meanness.  
neu-fill, v. unfold, unfurl.  
neu-filley, v. unfolding, unfurling.  
neu-firrinagh, a. untrue, unfaithful; s. m. 
an unfaithful person; pl. 71 [change -agh 
to -ee].  
neu-firrinid, s. m. unfaithfulness, 
perfidiousness.  
neu-firrinys. s. f. untruth, false assertion.  
neu-focklagh, a. in[e]ffable, unspeakable.  
neu-foiljagh, a. unblameable, faultless; s. 
m. a faultless person; pl. 71 [change -agh 
to -ee].  
250 
N 
 
neu-follan, a. unwholesome, prejudicial, 
insalubrious, corrupt.  
neu-follanid, s. m. unwholesomeness, 
&c.  
neu-fondagh, a. insufficient, incapable, 
insolvent; s. m. an incapable person; pl. 
71 [change -agh to -ee].  
neu-fondid, s. m. insufficiency.  
neu-fuidagh, a. unbecoming, indecent.  
neu-fuidid, s. m. indecency, indiscretion.  
neu-gherjagh, s. m. discomfort.  
neu-gherjoil, a. disconsolate.  
neu-gherjoilid, s. m. disconsolateness.  
neu-ghlen, a. unclean, impure, corrupt.  
s’neu-ghlen, a. how unclean. N 
neu-ghlennid, s. m. uncleanness, 
impurity, lewdness, incontinence.  
neu-ghoaiagh, a. untidy, slovenly, uncivil, 
imprudent.  
neu-ghoaiys s. f. untidiness, 
slovenliness, imprudence, want of 
decency.  
neu-gholl[-]ry[-]cheilley, a. dissimilar.  
neu-gholl[-]ry[-]cheillid, s. m. 
dissimilarity.  
neu-ghoo[g]hysagh, a. unnatural, 
disaffectionate.  
neu-ghoogh<y>yssid, s. m. disaffection, 
unnaturalness.  
neu-ghooie, a. unkindly; barren; 2 Kings, 
ii. 19: …ta'n ard-valley shoh soit er boayl 
aalin, myr ta my hiarn fakin: agh ta'n ushtey 
neu-follan, as ta'n thalloo neu-ghooie. …the 
situation of this city is pleasant, as my lord 
seeth: but the water is naught, and the 
ground barren.  
neu-ghooytit, a. undoubted.  
neu-ghortit, a. unhurt.  
neu-haaghit, a. unfrequented.  
neu-haitnyssagh, a. unpleasing, 
unpleasant.  
neu-harroogh, a. unthrifty, careless.  
s’neu-harroogh, a. how unthrifty. N 
neu-harrooghys, s. f. unthriftiness, sloth.  
neu-hastagh, a. unmindful, insensible, 
regardless.  
neu-heelt, a. intemperate, inebriated.  
neu-heeltys, s. f. intemperance, 
inebriety.  
neu-heihlltagh, a. immaterial, incorporal.  
neu-heihlltys, s. m. immateriality.  
neu-hickyr, a. unsure, unsteady, unstable.  
neu-hickyrys, s. f. uncertainty, 
precariousness, unsteadiness.  
neu-hoiggaltagh, a. not having 
understanding, ignorant.  
neu-hoiggaltys, s. f. want of 
understanding. 
neu-hoilshit, a. unenlightened; undeclared.  
neu-hoit, a. unset, unplanted.  
neu-hreishteilagh, a. not to be trusted, 
perfidious, treacherous.  
neu-hurransagh, a. insufferable, not to be 
endured.  
neu-hushtagh, a. foolishly; 1 Chron. xxi. 
8: S'mooar ta my loght, son shen ta mee er 
n'yannoo: agh nish gueeym ort, gow ersooyl 
peccah dty harvaant, son ta mee er n'yannoo 
dy feer neu-hushtagh. I have sinned greatly, 
because I have done this thing: but now, I 
beseech thee, do away the iniquity of thy 
servant; for I have done very foolishly.  
neu-hwoaiagh, a. unwary, incautious.  
neu-imneays, s. f. insolicitude; inanxiety.  
neu-imraait, a. unexpressed, unspoken of.  
neu-inshit, a. untold, unannounced.  
neu-iuit, a. undr[u]nk.  
neu-iuoil, a. undrinkable.  
neu-lauee, a. unhandy.  
neu-loghtynid, s. m. innocence, not guilty.  
neu-lomrit, a. unshorn, unfleeced.  
neu-loshagh, a. incombustible.  
neu-lowal, a. disallowable, unfit immoral, 
immodest, illtimed.  
s’neu-lowal, a. how disallowable. N 
neu-lowit, a. disallowed.  
neu-lughtit, unladen, unloaded.  
neu-nhee, a. reduced to mere nothing, 
useless for anything.  
neu-nieet, a. unwashen, unwashed.  
neu-oayllagh, a. unaccustomed Jer. xxxi. 
18: T'ou er my cherraghey, as va mee 
smaghtit, myr dow neuoayllagh er y whing. 
Thou hast chastised me, and I was 
chastised, as a bullock unaccustomed to the 
yoke. 
neu-onneragh, a. dishonest.  
neu-onnerid, s. m. dishonesty.  
neu-ooasle, a. ignoble, disgraceful.  
251 
N 
 
neu-raipit, a. unrent, untorn.  
neu-rea, uneven, not even.  
s’neu-rea a. how uneven, &c. N 
neu-resoonagh, a. unreasonable.  
neu-rheynnit, a. undivided, undistributed.  
neu-ronsoilagh, a. unsearchable, 
inscrutable, inexplorable.  
neu-ruggit, a. unborn.  
[n]eu-samp[l]eyrit, a. unexampled, 
unprecedented.  
neu-scansh, s. f. disregard, disesteem.  
neu-scelt, uncloven, uncleaved.  
neu-schleïo[i]l, unskilful.  
neu-skaht, a. unshook, unshaken, unshed.  
neu-skee, a. untired, unweary.  
neu-skilt, a. unshelled.  
neu-slayntoil, a. unhealthy.  
neu-smaghtit, a. uncorrected.  
neu-smoonit, a. unthought.  
neu-sniemmit, a. unknit, unnoosed.  
neu-snieuit, a. unspun.  
neu-soo-oil or neu-hoo-oil, a. unjuicy.  
neu-speeint, unpeeled.  
neu-spreit, a. unsprinkled.  
neu-spreiyt, a. unhacked.  
neu-stampit, a. untrodden.  
neu-stoamey, a. unstately.  
neu-stoamid, s. m. unstateliness.  
neu-vaasoil or [-]varvanagh, a. immortal.  
neu-vaghtal, a. indistinct, undiscerniblc.  
neu-vaihit, a. undrowned.  
neu-vanglanagh, a. without boughs.  
neu-varb, a. unharsh, pleasing.  
neu-vashtit, a. unbaptized.  
neu-vaynrey, a. unhappy, miserable.  
neu-veayn, a. unpermanent.  
neu-veein, a. untame; coarse.  
neu-vessoil, a. unfruitful, infertile, 
infecund  
neu-vessoilid, s. m. unfruitfulness.  
neu-vlaystal, a. unsavory, insipid.  
neu-vodjalit, a. unclouded.  
neu-voght, a. not poor.  
neu-vondeish, s. f. disadvantage.  
neu-vooiys, s. f. ingratitude.  
neu-vooisal, a. unthankful.  
neu-wooisal, a. unthankful. See also 
neu-vooisal.  
neu-vraaragh, a. unbrotherly.  
neu-vroie, a. unboiled.  
neu-vyghinagh, a. unmerciful, inclement.  
neu-vyghinid, s. m. unmercifulness.  
neu-walkit, a. untucked, unmilled.  
neu-whaalt, a. unsewed.  
neu-whuinnit, a. unreaped, unshorn, 
unpulled.  
neu-wooiagh, a. unwilling, unpleased.  
neu-yarroodagh, a. unforgetful.  
neu-yeant, a. undone, unmade.  
neu-yeean, a. not zealous.  
neu-yeeragh, a. indirect, not fair, not 
straight.  
neu-yeerys, s. f. injustice, iniquity, 
crookedness.  
neu-yeidagh, a. not assiduous, indiscreet.  
neu-yeight, a. unshut.  
neu-yerkit, a. unexpected.  
neu-yesh, a. improper, unbecoming, 
unsuitable, unseemly, inapplicable, 
awkward.  
neu-yiallit, a. unbleached.  
neu-yiallit, a. unpromised.  
neu-yientit, a. unconceived.  
neu-yingit, a. unpressed.  
neu-yllit, a. uncalled.  
neu-ymmydagh, or neu-ymmydoil, a. 
unuseful, useless.  
neu-ymmyrchagh, a. unnecessary, 
needless  
neu-ymmyrkit, a. unborne.  
neu-ynrick, a. insincere, unrighteous, 
unjust.  
neu-ynsit, a. unlearned, untaught, illiterate  
neu-yummalit, a. unwasted, unlavished.  
neu-yymmoossagh, a. not wrathful.  
nhedderagh, v. fidgeting or fidging.  
nhee, s. m. thing; pl. -aghyn or -ghyn.  
neu-nhee, a. reduced to mere nothing, 
useless for anything. 
niart, s. m. might, strength; pl. -yn. It is used 
adjectively for great, large, &c, as in Job. i. 
3: Va e chooid myrgeddin shiaght thousane 
keyrrey, as three thousaneyn dy chamellyn, as 
queig cheead whing dy ghew, as queig cheead 
assyl bwoirryn, as niart mooinjer; myr shen dy 
row yn dooinney shoh yn er s'berchee jeh 
ooilley deiney'n niar. His substance also was 
seven thousand sheep, and three thousand 
camels, and five hundred yoke of oxen, and 
252 
N 
 
five hundred she asses, and a very great 
household; so that this man was the greatest of 
all the men of the east.  
er-niart, adv. by might or force of arms. 
goaill-niart, v. prevailing; a. prevalent. 
niart* or niartee, v. give might or strength.  
n[ia]rtey, v. strengthen, make mighty.  
dy niartaghey, v. to strengthen.  
niartit, 85. strengthened, made mighty.  
niartal, a. mighty, strong, potent.  
s’niartal, a. how mighty, or strong; comp. 
and sup. N 
by-niartal, adv. because of strength, those 
of strength; Psl. lxxviii. 52: As woaill eh 
ooilley yn chied v'er nyn ruggey ayns Egypt: yn 
vooinjer b'yrjey as by-niartal ayns cummallyn 
Ham. And smote all the first-born in Egypt: the 
most principal and mightiest in the dwellings of 
Ham. 
ooilley-niartal, a. almighty, omnipotent. 
niartallagh, s. m. a mighty person; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
n[ia]rtallys, s. f. mightiness, dignity.  
niarteyder, s. m. a strengthener; pl. -yn.  
niau, s. m. heaven; pl. -ghyn.  
niee, v. wash; -agh, 77; -ee, 80.  
niaghyn, v. washing.  
nieeaghyn, v. washing. See also niaghyn.  
nieet, pt. washed.  
neu-nieet, a. unwashen, unwashed. 
niaghyn, s. m. washing; pl. -yn. 
nieeder, s. m. a washer; pl. -yn.  
nieu, s. f. venom, virulence, poison.  
ard-nieu, s. m. a serpent; pl. -yn. 
nieuagh, a. venomous, virulent.  
s’nieunagh (sic), a. how poisonous or 
venomous. N 
s’nieunee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. N 
nieunys, or nieunid, s. f. venomousness.  
nish, adv. now, this time; -tagh, id. em.  
niurin, s. m. hell; pl. -yn.  
niurinagh, a. hellish, infernal; s. m. an 
inhabitant of hell; pl. -yn.  
niurinys, s. f. hellishness.  
noa, a. new, modern, recent.  
s’noa, a. how new or modern; comp. and 
sup. N 
ass-y-noa, adv. anew, over again.  
thalk-noa, a. spick-span new. 
noaey, a. pl. new, modern, &c.  
noaid, s. m. newness, recentness.  
noadyr, conj. neither, not either.  
noain, a. of necessity, of irresistible power, 
free from choice, [by] inevitable fate.  
noal, adv. from a place home, [hither], from 
the other side to this, from thence, from 
where the speaker is, opposed to noon.  
noght, s. to-night, this night.  
yn oie-noght, s. f. this very night. 
noid, s. m. an enemy, an adversary; pl. -yn  
noidagh, a. hostile, at enmity.  
noidey, a. d. of an enemy; Jer. xxx. 14: 
…son ta mee er dty lhottey lesh lhott noidey, 
lesh smaghtaghey fer dewil, son mooadys dty 
vee-chairys; son dy row dty pheccaghyn 
ymmodee. …for I have wounded thee with the 
wound of an enemy, with the chastisement of a 
cruel one, for the multitude of thine iniquity; 
because thy sins were increased.  
noid-ny-hanmey, s. m. the enemy of souls.  
noidys, s. f. enmity, hostility, animosity.  
Nollick 
yn Nollick, s. the Christmas. O  
Ollick, s. f. Christmas; from Yule or Yulic, 
Scotch, or halg (holy), Saxon. Prov. 
“Ollick vog rhullic vea.” [A soft 
Christmas, a fat churchyard.] 
nonney 
er-nonney, adv. else, or else, at least. 
noo, s. m. a saint; pl. -ghyn.  
noo, a. holy, sacred, hallowed, divine.  
noon, adv. to a part from home, [hence], to 
the other side from this, to beyond 
somewhere, over.  
noon as noal, adv. hence & thence, to & 
fro.  
tar noon, adv. come over; Acts, xvi. 9: Hass 
dooinney jeh Macedonia liorish, as ghuee eh 
er, gra, Tar noon gys Macedonia, as cooin 
lhien. There stood a man of Macedonia, and 
prayed him, saying, Come over into 
Macedonia, and help us.  
nurree, s. f. last year, the past year.  
nuy, s. m. nine.  
nuy-jeig, a. nineteen.  
253 
N 
 
nuy as feed, s. m. twenty and nine.  
nuy feed, s. m. nine score or 180.  
nuy feedoo, a. hundred and eightieth.  
nuyr 
nuir, s. m. next day after to-morrow.  
kin nuyr, s. the end of next night.  
laa ny nuyr, s. the next day after to-
morrow. 
ny, a prefix or particle used in composition, 
and when prefixed to adjectives makes the 
comparative case; as, ny share (better); ny 
saa (younger), &c.; and when prefixed to 
other words signified, literally, a, in 
English; as in ny vud (among); ny chour 
(for him), but more literally it would be (a 
for him); ny hrooid literally (a through 
him).  
ny, adv. not. This word, which is a corruption 
of nagh, ought not to be. See nagh.  
ny, art. pl. the, the article used before plural 
nouns; it is also used before [feminine] 
singular nouns in the genitive or ownership 
case; as, eaghtyr ny hooirrey (the surface of 
the earth, or rather the earth's surface); 
skianyn ny geayee (the wings of the win d, 
or more literally the wind's wings); 
cliaghtey ny çheerey (the country's custom). 
It is also used for the article a and an, as in 
the service of baptism, ny heirey (an heir); 
ny henn ghooinney (an old man); ny 
vreagerey (a liar); ny lomarcan (alone).  
ny, conj. or, nor; as, eshyn ny mish (he or I); 
dooinney ny ben (man or woman); ny mish 
(nor I); ny eshyn (nor he).  
nyn, pro. our, their, your; ours, theirs, yours, 
and sometimes them, these, those, we, &c. 
or where it is placed in Luke, xiii. 2: Vel 
shiuish sheiltyn dy row ny Galileanee shoh nyn 
beccee erskyn ooilley ny Galileanee, er-y-fa dy 
duillee ad lheid y baase? Suppose ye that 
these Galilaeans were sinners above all the 
Galilaeans, because they suffered such 
things?, and in Acts, ii. 32: Shoh yn Yeesey 
cheddin ta Jee er hroggal seose, myr ta shinyn 
ooilley nyn veanishyn. This Jesus hath God 
raised up, whereof we all are witnesses, and 
such like places the last n must be 
redundant.11 This word causes great 
changes in the initials of primary words. 
See Remark 118.  
                                                 
11 Why does Cregeen think the final -n is redundant? 
These are predicate nominal plurals with possessive 
determiners, so nyn is what you would expect. 
254 
O 
 
O 
O, interj. oh!  
oabbyr, s. f. a seedlop, a hopper. 
y noabbyr, s. the seedlop or hopper. O  
e hoabyr, s. her seed lop. O 
oaiagh, a. perjured, forsworn. A person is 
said to be so when he swears a thing to be 
true, which he knows to be false. Loo-
oaiagh (a false oath).  
oaieys, s. f. perjury.  
oaie or oaye, s. f. a grave; -ghyn.  
oaye, s. f. grave. See Hymn Book for this 
spelling, which would I think have been 
better; as oaie is used for front or face.  
ny hoaie, a. d. of the grave; Psl. lxxxvi. 13: 
…as t’ou er livrey m’annym veih diunid ny 
hoaie. …and thou hast delivered my soul from 
the nethermost hell. O 
ny hoaiaghyn, s. the graves; Luke viii. 27: 
As tra v’eh er n’gholl er thalloo, haink ny whail 
ass yn ard-valley, dooinney dy row va ry-foddey 
seaghnit lesh drogh-spyrrydyn, as cha row eh 
ceau eaddagh, chamoo duirree eh ayns thie 
erbee, agh mastey ny hoaiaghyn. And when 
he went forth to land, there met him out of the 
city a certain man, which had devils long time, 
and ware no clothes, neither abode in any 
house, but in the tombs. O  
clagh-oaie, s. a gravestone. 
oaie, s. m. face, front; Jer. xxxii, 33: Son t’ad 
er jyndaa cooyl rhym, as cha nee nyn oaie 
orrym. And they have turned unto me the back, 
and not the face; -yn.  
fraue-oaie, s. f. a feature; pl. -yn. 
oainjyr, s. f. a harlot, a concubine. For the 
etymology of the oain in this word and the 
three following, I find that in the 
dictionary, by the Rev. W. Shaw, M.A., it 
is a person or thing on loan or hire.  
ben-oainjyr or ben-oainjyragh, s. f. a 
harlot, a concubine. 
oainjyragh, a. illegitimate, out of 
marriage, base born; lhiannoo oainjyragh 
(a bastard); in ludicrous language called fer 
thammag. 
dy oainjyraghey, to bastardize.  
oainjyrys, s. f. bastardy.  
oaldey, wolfish, voracious, rapacious, eager 
after prey, wild. 
moddey oaldey, s. m. a wolf. 
oalee 
doo[-]oalee, s. f. a spider; pl. -yn. 
oalsum, s. m. a tie on a thievish cow, a rope 
tied from the horn or head to the leg.  
oalsumit, 85. tied from the horn to the leg.  
oalys, s. f. a charm, a divination Ez. xxi. 22: 
Ec y laue yesh va’n oalys son Jerusalem, dy 
phointeil captanyn, dy osley yn veeal ayns y 
dunverys, dy hroggal seose coraa lesh 
yllaghey, dy oardaghey greïnyn brishee noi ny 
giattyn, dy cheau seose carnane, as dy hroggal 
toor-caggee. At his right hand was the 
divination for Jerusalem, to appoint captains, to 
open the mouth in the slaughter, to lift up the 
voice with shouting, to appoint battering rams 
against the gates, to cast a mount, and to build 
a fort.  
e hoalys, s. her charm. O 
oalysagh, s. m. an enchanter; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]; adv. enchantingly. 
oanluck, v. bury, inter, deposit in the earth or 
in stones; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86 -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha n’oanluck, v. 128. not bury or inter.  
doanluck, v. did bury or inter, buried. O.  
goanluck, v. 61. bury, inter; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms. 94. O  
goanluckey, v. 61. burying, interring. 
er n’oanluckey, v. hath, &c. buried, &c.  
oanluckit, 85. buried, interred.  
s’oanluckit, how buried. O 
oanluckey, s. m. a funeral or burial, pl. 
<76> [67? change -ey to -aghyn].  
e hoanluckey, s. her burial. O 
oanluckee, a. d. of a funeral, or burial. <pl. 
76.> 
oanluckeyder, s. m. a burier, one who 
buries.  
oanrey, s. m. a petticoat; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
oard or oardee, v. order, ordain; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
oardr or oardree, v. will order, &c.; -agh, 
77; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
255 
O 
 
88.  
cha n’oard or n’oardr, v. not order or 
ordain. O  
doardee, v. did ordain or ordained, did 
order or ordered.  
goardaghey, v. ordering, ordaining. O  
goardrail (sic: stress), v. ordering, 
ordereth, &c, &c. O 
dy oardaghey, v. to order or ordain.  
dy oardrail (sic: stress), v. to set in order, 
&c.  
er n’oardaghey or n’oardrail (sic: stress), 
v. hath, &c. ordered or ordained. O  
oarderit, 85. ordered, ordained.  
oardagh, s. m. ordinance, order; pl. -yn. 
Prov. “Obbyr dyn oardagh obbyr dyn 
booise.” [Work without order is work 
without thanks.] 
oardrailys (sic: stress), s. f. order or 
ordering.  
oarlagh, s. m. an inch; pl. 72 [change -agh to 
-eeyn]. Prov. “Tra tou jannoo yn trie jean 
yn oarlagh.” [When thou art making the 
foot, make the inch.] 
oarn, s. f. barley; pl. -teeyn.  
e hoarn, s. her barley. O 
ushag roauyr ny hoarn, s. f. the bunting. 
oaseir, s. m. an overser, a. guardian; pl. -yn.  
oaseirys, s. f. guardianship, &c.  
oash, s. m. habit. Used more in a bad sense; 
as, drogh-oash (a bad habit).  
oasht, s. f. a yearling sheep, a sheep of one 
year. It is used for ewe and male, as in 
Exod. xii. 5: Bee’n eayn fegooish lheamys, 
oasht fyrryn: nee shiu goaill eh veih ny kirree, 
ny veih ny goair. Your lamb shall be without 
blemish, a male of the first year: ye shall take it 
out from the sheep, or from the goats.  
oashyr, s. f. a stocking, a blade of corn or 
grass; Exod. ix. 32: Agh cha row’n churnagh 
n’yn shoggyl naardey, son cha row ad foast ass 
yn oashyr. But the wheat and the rie were not 
smitten: for they were not grown up; pl. -yn, 
hose; Dan. iii. 21: Eisht va ny deiney shoh 
kianlt ayns nyn gooatyn, nyn oashyryn, as nyn 
idd, as nyn eaddagh elley, as v’ad ceaut stiagh 
ayns mean yn choirrey aileagh-loshtee. Then 
these men were bound in their coats, their 
hosen, and their hats, and their other garments, 
and were cast into the midst of the burning fiery 
furnace. 
oashyr-slobbagh, s. f. a stocking having no 
sole to the foot, but a lappet covering the 
top of the foot, with a loop to the fore toe 
and a heel strap.  
oashyr-voynnee, s. f. a stocking without a 
foot but having a string under the foot.  
oast, a. frequented, resorted to; as, thie oast 
(an inn, a public house), a house where 
people frequent or resort, to drink strong 
drink or liquor. See ben-oast.  
oast-rick, s. m. a public or ale-house sign.  
ben-oast, s. f. the land-lady of a public 
house or inn. 
thie oast, s. m. an inn, a public house. 
oasteyder, s. m. an inn-keeper, a publican.  
oastys, s. f. what is sold by the publican, or 
perhaps the authority or licence whereby 
they are permitted to sell or retail. Vel ad 
shoh freayl oastys myleeaney? [Are these 
keeping the licence thus year?] 
oayl[-]luss, s. f. the science of botany.  
oayll, s. m. a haunt, a place much frequented 
or used, usage.  
oa[y]ldyn, s. pl. haunts, lurking places.  
oayll, a. as in gobbag-oayll, a species of 
dogfish, that stays on frequented places. I 
believe this to be the word, and not 
gobbag-ghoal, as the fish is not blind.  
oayll[-]aashagh, a. easy disposed, not 
violent.  
gyn-oayl, a. foreign. 
uyll, a. (from oayl), a frequented watering 
place; as, logh-uyll (a pool or lake near a 
house where animals go to water).  
oayllagh 
oayllagh, a. wonted, habitual, customary, 
usual, inured to by habit, acquired by long 
practice, acquainted with.  
s’oayllagh, a. how used of. O 
s’oayllee, a. id., comp. and sup. O 
dy ve oayllagh, v. to be accustomed, used 
of, usual. 
neu-oayllagh, a. unaccustomed Jer. xxxi. 
18: T’ou er my cherraghey, as va mee 
smaghtit, myr dow neuoayllagh er y whing. 
Thou hast chastised me, and I was chastised, 
256 
O 
 
as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke. 
oayltagh 
anoayltagh, a. unaccustomed. See also 
neu[-]. 
bollagh, [v]. (from by[-]oayllagh), wont, or 
used of; 1 Sam. xviii. 10: As haink eh gy-
kione ny lurg shoh dy daink spyrryd olk veih 
Jee er Saul, as veih branlaadee ayns mean e 
hie; as ren David cloie lesh e laue, myr bollagh 
eh: as va shleiy ayns laue Saul. And it came to 
pass on the morrow, that the evil spirit from 
God came upon Saul, and he prophesied in the 
midst of the house: and David played with his 
hand, as at other times: and there was a javelin 
in Saul’s hand.  
boallagh, usage. See bollagh.  
boallin, v. I was used, or wont; Judges, xvi. 
20: As ghooisht eh ass e chadley, as dooyrt 
eh, Hem’s magh myr boallin, dy chraa mee-
hene. As cha row fys echey dy row y Chiarn er 
hreigeil eh. And he awoke out of his sleep, and 
said, I will go out as at other times before, and 
shake myself. And he wist not that the Lord 
was departed from him; -s, id. em.  
oayrd or oard, s. f. a hammer; formerly 
applied to big and little, but now generally 
applied to a sledge hammer; pl. -yn  
oard, s. f. a large hammer. See oayrd. 
ob or obb*, v. deny, refuse, disown; -agh, 
77;-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms 
87; -ys, 88.  
cha n’ob or n’obb*, v. 128. not deny. O  
dob, v. did deny or denied, did refuse or 
refused, did object or objected. O. 
gobbal, v. denying, denies, &c, &c. O  
dy obbal, v. to deny, refuse, forbid.  
e hobbal, s. her denial. O 
er n’obbal, v. hath, &c. denied. O 
obbit, 85. denied, refused, forbidden.  
s’obbit, a. how denied. O 
obbeyder, s. m. a denier; pl. -yn.  
obbaltagh, s. m. an abstainer; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
obbaltys, s. f. abstinence; pl. -syn  
ob, s. m. hops.  
obaiha or obaihagh, s. a word to call or 
frighten deer.  
obb 
obbee, a. d. of enchantment or sorcery.  
fir-obbee, s. pl. wizards, sorcerers; 2 
Chron. xxxiii. 6: …myrgeddin hug eh geill da 
traaghyn, as deiyr eh er obbeeys, as chliaghtee 
eh buitcheraght, as ren eh dellal rish spyrrydyn-
faishnee, as rish fir-obbee: d’obbree eh shen 
ny va olk ayns shilley yn chiarn, dy vrasnaghey 
eh gys corree. …also he observed times, and 
used enchantments, and used witchcraft, and 
dealt with a familiar spirit, and with wizards: he 
wrought much evil in the sight of the Lord, to 
provoke him to anger. 
obbeeys, s. f. ariolation, enchantment, 
sorcery.  
e hobbeeys, s. her sorcery divination, &c. 
Acts, xvi. 16: As haink eh gy-kione, myr va 
shin er y raad goll gys padjer, dy daink ben aeg 
dy row nyn guail, ayn-jee va spyrryd faishnee, 
as v’ee tayrn ymmodee cosney da ny 
mainshteryn eck, liorish e hobbeeys. And it 
came to pass, as we went to prayer, a certain 
damsel possessed with a spirit of divination met 
us, which brought her masters much gain by 
soothsaying. O 
obbr* or obbree, v. work; -agh, 77; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha n’obbr* or n’obbree, v. not work. O  
dobbree, v. did work, wrought, &c. O.  
gobbragh or gobbraghey, v. working. O 
er n’obbraghey, v. hath, &c. wrought. O  
dy obbraghey, v. to work, to labour, to 
operate, to ferment, to toil.  
obbrit, 85. wrought.  
s’obbrit, a. how wrought. O 
obbyr, s. f. work, labour, toil, operation, 
action; pl. -aghyn. Prov. “Obbyr laa yn 
ghuilley buigh (or buee), obbyr laue” 
(manual). [The day work of the yellow boy 
(gold) is hand (manual) work.] 
e hobbyr, s. her work. O 
e hobbraghyn, s. her works. O  
obbree, s. m. a worker, a workman; pl. -yn.  
e hobbree, s. her worker. O 
ard-obbree, s. m. an architect; pl. -yn. 
obbrinagh, s. m. a mechanic; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
oe, s. m. f. a grandchild, a son or daughter of a 
son or daughter; pl. -ghyn.  
257 
O 
 
e hoe, s. her grand-child; pl. -ghyn. O 
aa-oe, s. m. a great grandchild. 
oenyn, s. f. oxlip or cowslip.  
offishear, s. m. an overseer, an officer; pl. 
-yn.  
oghe, s. f. oven; pl. -yn. Prov. “Yn oghe 
gyllagh toyn losht da’n aiee.” [The oven 
calling ‘burnt breech’ to the kiln.] 
ogher, s. f. a key; pl. -yn.  
e hogher, s. her key; pl. -yn. O 
oghrish, s. f. bosom; pl. -yn.  
dy oghrishey, v. to embosom.  
oghrishit, 85. embosomed.  
oghsan, s. f. rebuke, reproof; pl. -yn.  
oghsanagh, a. reprehensible.  
oght or ught, s. f. the corn that a set of 
reapers cut at once through a field.  
ught, s. f. lap. See oght; pl. -yn. 
oghyr, s. f. the roe or spawn of fish; pl. -yn.  
oghyragh, a. d. of roe or spawn.  
oi, pre. against; as, dt’oi (against thee); -s, id. 
em. N  
noï, pre. & p. p. against, against him  
e hoï, pre. against her. 
m’oï, p. p. against me; a contraction of my 
and noï.  
ry-hoï or ry-oï, adv. reserved against, for 
and against. 
roï, adv. reserved for, provided for or 
against. 
noï ry hoï, adv. against one another.  
noïys, s. f. opposition, prejudice.  
oie, s. f. night; pl. -ghyn.  
ny hoie, s. of the night, the night. O 
er-oie, adv. by night, on the night. 
fud-ny-hoie, adv. through the night. 
kin-oie, s. (the kin from kione), the end of 
the night. 
mean-oie, s. m. midnight. 
trimshey ny hoie, s. the dead of the night. 
Oie-Innyd, s. f. the night before Ash 
Wednesday. Prov.  
“Oie-Innyd bee dty volg lane 
My jig laa Caisht yiow traast son shen.” 
[On Shrove Tuesday (the eve of the fast) 
thy belly shall be full; before Easter day 
comes thou shalt fast for that.] 
Another:  
“Oie mooie, as oie elley sthie  
Olk son cabbil, agh son kirree mie.” [A 
night outside and another night inside, bad 
for horses but good for sheep.] 
oie’l or eail, s. f. eve, even or vigil, the 
night preceding a feast or festival, whether 
the first or last of these is best, perhaps 
ought to partake of both; as, oielaa’l the 
eve or night of the festival.  
eeil or oiel, s. the night of. 
yn oie-noght, s. f. this very night.  
oie-rehollys, s. f. a moon light night.  
oik, s. m. office; pl. -yn.  
fer-oik, s. m. an officer, a person in office. 
e ir-oik, s. his officers. F 
oikan, s. m. an infant; pl. -yn. There is a 
pronunciation of this word on the south 
side of the island oinkan or inkan.  
e hoikan, s. her infant. O 
oikanagh, a. infantile, infantine.  
oikanys, s. f. infancy, first part of life.  
oir or oirr, s. m. edge, verge, the edge of 
anything not sharp; the sharp edge is foyr.  
oirr-cruin[n]ey, s. m. the horizon.  
oirr-mooie, s. m. outside or edge, outer 
edge.  
oirr sthie, s. m. the inside edge or verge.  
oirrag, s. f. a ridge or drill; pl. -yn.  
dy oirrysey, v. to chaff of the edge by 
tossing.  
oirrysit, 85. chaft, the edge worn.  
olk, a. evil, bad, noxious, wicked.  
s’olk, a. how evil, ill, bad. Prov. “Myr 
s’olk ayn smessey ass.” [The more evil in 
it, the wors[e] out of it.] O  
smessey, a. worse, worst. 
dy olk, adv. wickedly, badly.  
dy holk, adv. evil, wickedly; Psalm cix. 19, 
in the day of the month Psalms: Shoh myr 
nee eh taghyrt da my noidyn veih’n Chiarn: as 
dauesyn myrgeddin ta loayrt dy holk noi 
m’annym. Let it thus happen from the Lord unto 
mine enemies: and to those that speak evil 
against my soul. O 
olkey, a. pl. evil, bad, wicked.  
olk, s. f.  
y n’olk, s. the evil, the injury. O  
uilk, s. pl. evils; the pl. of olk. See also 
258 
O 
 
huilk; Deu. xxxi. 17: Nagh vel ny huilk shoh 
er jeet orrin, er-yn-oyr nagh vel y Chiarn nyn 
Yee ny mast’ ain? Are not these evils come 
upon us, because our God is not among us?  
ny huilk, s. the evils. U 
olkid, s. m. badness, evilness.  
olkys, s. f. wickedness, iniquity, malignity, 
corruption of manners, moral, ill.  
olkyssagh, a. evil disposed, wickedly 
designed; s. m. an evil disposed person; pl. 
71 [change -agh to -ee].  
s’olkyssagh, a. how wicked, iniquitous. O 
s’olkyssee, a. id., comp. and sup. O 
ollagh, s. f. cattle. Though this word does not 
require the pl. article, it requires the pl. 
adjective.  
y n’ollagh, s. pl. the cattle. Though this 
word is seldom found in its present 
orthography, it is inserted as pronounced. 
See nah. O  
e hollagh, s. her cattle. O 
ollee, a. d. of cattle.  
breck-ollee, s. f. the cow pox. 
oltaghey ollee (a cattle salute, a fight) 
tarroo-ollee, s. m. a cow’s bull, in 
opposition to other bulls. 
thie ollee, s. f. a cow-house. 
ollaghan, s. m. an angle, the angle on a hedge 
spade for the foot; pl. -yn.  
ollan, s. wool; pl. -yn.  
olley, a. d. of wool, woollen.  
braain-olley, s. m. the shell of the razor 
fish bruised to powder. 
cass-olley, s. f. hairs of old wool that 
adhere to sheep, whereby the fleece is kept 
on longer at shearing time; some will have 
it to mean caslys olley (the sign of new 
wool, or new growth); it is common to call 
leg, cass; as, cass stoyl (the foot of a stool); 
cass vrisht (a broken leg). 
eglhin[-]olley, s. m. linsey woolsey. 
snaie-olley, s. m. woollen yarn. 
ollanagh, a. woolly.  
ollay, s. f. a swan; pl. ollee.  
ollish, s. f. sweat, perspiration; pl. -yn.  
çheet-magh-ollish, s. f. 5. perspiration.  
gollish, v. 61. sweating. O 
ollym, s. m. alum.  
olt or oltee, v. salute or give refreshment; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
oltee-jee, v. salute ye, or give ye 
refreshment; 1 Peter, v. 14: Oltee-jee y 
cheilley lesh paag dy ghraih [creestee]. Greet 
ye one another with a kiss of charity.  
goltaghey, v. saluting; Luke, x. 4: Ny cur-jee 
lhieu sporran, ny spagey, ny braagyn: as ny 
jean-jee cumrail ayns goltaghey dooinney 
erbee er y raad. Carry neither purse, nor scrip, 
nor shoes: and salute no man by the way. O 
dy oltaghey, v. to salute; Mark, xv. 18: As 
ren ad toshiaght dy oltaghey da, Dy vannee 
dhyt, Ree ny Hewnyn. And began to salute him, 
Hail, King of the Jews; to receive; Matt. x. 4 
[not in the cited verse. Was Matt. x. 1412 
intended, or Matt. x. 41,13 both with cur 
oltaghey-bea da?], to get the members or 
organs of the body refreshed by meat, drink 
or sleep. oltaghey ollee (a cattle salute, a 
fight).  
oltaghey-bea, s. refreshment in life by 
being brought to partake of meat, drink or 
sleep which sustain nature; Acts, xxviii. 7: 
Ayns ny ardjyn shen va thieyn as thalloo lesh 
kiannoort ny hellan, va enmyssit Publius, hug 
dooin oltaghey-bea, as aaght ry three laa dy 
arryltagh In the same quarters were 
possessions of the chief man of the island, 
whose name was Publius; who received us, 
and lodged us three days courteously.  
olt, s. f. an organ, a faculty of the body, a 
member, a limb of the body; pl. -yn.  
oltey, s. m. a member of society, a member 
of a body of people; pl. -nyn.  
                                                 
12 Eshyn ta cur oltaghey-bea da phadeyr ayns 
ennym phadeyr, yiow eh leah phadeyr as eshyn ta 
cur oltaghey-bea da dooinney cairagh ayns 
ennym dooinney cairagh, yiow eh leagh dooinney 
cairagh. He that receiveth a prophet in the name 
of a prophet shall receive a prophet’s reward; and 
he that receiveth a righteous man in the name of a 
righteous man shall receive a righteous man’s 
reward. 
13 As quoi-erbee nagh der oltaghey bea diu, as 
nagh der geill da ny goan eu: tra aagys shiu yn 
thie ny’n ard-valley shen, crie-jee veue joan nyn 
goshey. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor 
hear your words, when ye depart out of that house 
or city, shake off the dust of your feet. 
259 
O 
 
oltooan, v. reproach, disgrace; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
cha n’oltooan, v. not reproach; -agh; -ee; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. O 
doltooan, v. did reproach or blaspheme. O.  
goltooan or goltooaney, v. reproaching, 
reviling, scandalizing, &c. O  
dy oltooaney, v. to reproach, to upbraid.  
er n’oltooaney, v. hath, &c. reproached. O  
oltooanit, 85. reproached, upbraided.  
s’oltooanit, a. how reproached. O 
oltooan, s. m. a reproacher, &c.  
oltooanagh, a. reproachful, reproachable; 
s. m. upbraider, one who reproaches; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
s’oltooanagh, a. how reproachful. O 
s’oltooanee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. O 
ommidan, s. m. a fool; pl. -yn.  
ommidjagh, a. foolish.  
s’ommidjagh, a. how foolish. O 
s’ommidjee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. O 
dy ommidjagh, adv. foolishly.  
ommidjys, s. f. foolishness.  
oney, a. innocent.  
s’oney, a. how innocent, comp. and sup. O 
dy oney, adv. innocently.  
onid, s. m. innocence.  
onnane, s. f. a thistle; pl. -yn.  
onnane-franagh, s. f. the down or cotton 
thistle.  
on[n]ane-veein or onnane-vuck, s. f. the 
sow-thistle.  
onnane-Voirrey, s. f. the cardus-thistle.  
onnaneagh, a. thistly.  
Onnee, s. f. Ann.  
onnor, s. m. honour.  
onneragh, a. honest.  
s’onneragh, a. how honest. O 
s’onneree, a. id., em. [comp. and sup.,] 58. 
O 
meeonneragh, a. dishonest; s. m. a 
dishonest person; pl. 71 [change -agh to 
-ee]. 
neu-onneragh, a. dishonest. 
onnerid, honesty.  
onnoroil, a. honourable.  
s’onnoroil, a. how honourable, comp. and 
sup. 
onnoroilid, s. m. honourableness.  
oo, pro. thou, sometimes thee and thy; as, 
hooar mee thie oo (I got thee home); 
oohene (thyself).  
oohene, pro. thyself.  
ooasle, a. worthy, noble, excellent, exalted, 
sublime, magnificent.  
s’ooasle, a. how worthy, noble, great, 
illustrious, exalted, sublime, magnificent, 
comp. and sup. O 
ooasley, a. pl. worshipful, reverent, noble, 
sublime.  
meeooasle, a. ignoble, mean. 
mooar-ooasle, a. great honour, honourable; 
Acts, xxviii. 10: As ren ad myrgeddin 
soiaghey mooar ooasle y yannoo j’in, as tra 
ghow shin lhuingys, laad ad shin lesh dy 
chooilley nhee ymmyrchagh er nyn son. Who 
also honoured us with many honours; and 
when we departed, they laded us with such 
things as were necessary. 
neu-ooasle, a. ignoble, disgraceful. 
ooashl or ooashlee, v. worship, pay 
adoration, reverence, do homage; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
-ys, 88.  
cha n’ooashl* or n’ooashlee, v. not 
worship. O 
gooashlagh, s. 61. worship, worshippeth, 
&c. O  
gooashlaghey, v. 61. worshipping. O 
dy ooashlaghey, v. to worship, to do 
homage.  
dy wooashlaghey v. to worship, O  
Note.-I have initialled these words from o, 
with w, though I never saw them so written; 
yet nothing is more common than to hear 
them so spoken.  
er n’ooashlaghey, v. hath &c. worshipped 
O  
ooashlit, 85. worshipped, revered.  
wooashlit, 85. worshipped. O 
s’ooashlit, a. how worshipped. O 
ooashley, s. m. worship, adoration, honour, 
dignity, &c.  
ooashlee, a. d. of worship, &c.  
ard-ooasley, s. m. adoration; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn]. 
260 
O 
 
ooashleyder, s. m. a worshipper, &c.; pl. 
-yn.  
yn wooashleyder, s. the worshipper. O  
ooashlid or ooashlys, s. f. excellency, 
eminency, dignity, nobleness.  
ooh, s. f. an egg; pl. -yn.  
oohey, a. pl. [??= a. d.] eggs; a. d. of eggs.  
ny hoohyn, s. the eggs. Prov. “Lhig dy 
chooilley ushag guirr e hoohyn hene.” [Let 
every bird hatch its own eggs.] O 
oohagh, a. oviparous.  
ooh, s. f. an udder; pl. -ghyn.  
ooig, s. f. a pit; pl. -yn.  
ny hooigyn, s. the pits. O 
ooigey 
ny hooigey, a. d. of the pit<s>. O  
ooiganagh, a. full of pits.  
s’ooiganagh, a. how full of pits. O 
s’ooiganee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. O 
ooill, s. f. oil; pl. -yn. 
e hooil, s. her oil. O 
ooill, v. oil or anoint; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha n’ooill* or n’ooilee, v. not oil or 
anoint; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym;-yms, 94. O  
dooilee or dooillee, v. did oil, did anoint.  
gooillagh, v. oil, oils, oileth, &c. O  
gooillaghey, v. oiling. O 
dy ooillaghey, v. to oil or anoint.  
er n’ooillaghey, v. hath oiled or anointed O  
ooillit, 85. oiled, anointed.  
s’ooillit, a. how anointed or oiled. O 
ooilleyder, s. m. one who oils or anoints.  
ooilley, a. all; s. m. all, the whole.  
ooilley as ass, adv. all and all; lit. all and 
out.  
ooilley cooidjagh, adv. altogether, quite.  
ooilley-niartal, a. almighty, omnipotent.  
ooilley-niartalys, s. f. excellency; Job, xl. 
10: Coamree nish oo-hene lesh ard-ooashley 
as ooilley-niartalys; as soie oo-hene magh 
lesh gloyr as aalid. Deck thyself now with 
majesty and excellency; and array thyself with 
glory and beauty.  
ooilley-tushtagh, a. all-knowing, 
omniscious.  
dy chooilley, adv. every. See dy.  
hoshiaght ooilley, a. first of all. T 
ooir, s. f. earth, soil, mould.  
ooirrey, a. pl. [??] earth, mould, soil.  
ooirrey, a. d. of the earth or soil.  
ny hooirrey, a. d. of the earth or mould. O 
ooir, ooirr*, or oo[i]rree, v. earth, mould; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys,88.  
cha n’ooir or n’ooirr*, v. not earth or 
mould; -agh; -ee; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. 
O  
dooir or dooirree, v. did earth or cover 
with mould. O. 
gooir[r]agh or gooir[r]aghey, v. 61. 
earthing. O  
dy ooirraghey, v. to earth or mould.  
er n’ooirraghey, v. hath, &c. earthed, &c. 
O  
ooirrit, 85. earthed, moulded.  
s’ooirrit, a. how earthed. O 
ooirreyder, s. m. one who earths or 
moulds.  
ooirragh 
s’ooirragh, a. how earthy. O 
s’ooirree, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. O 
ooley, s. m. estimation; Lev. vi. 6: As ver eh 
lesh yn oural-loght echey gys y Chiarn, rea gyn 
lheamys ass y chioltane, marish yn ooley, son 
oural-loght gys y taggyrt. And he shall bring his 
trespass offering unto the Lord, a ram without 
blemish out of the flock, with thy estimation, for 
a trespass offering, unto the priest.  
ooleyder, s. m. an estimator; pl. -yn.  
oolit, 85. estimated; determined; Exod. xxi. 
22; amerced: My nee deiney streeu, as 
gortaghey ben torragh, myr shen dy jig ee roish 
e traa, as dyn assee sodjey; bee eh dy shickyr 
er ny cherraghey, rere myr ver dooinney’n ven 
er, as bee eh oolit lurg oardagh ny briwnyn. If 
men strive, and hurt a woman with child, so that 
her fruit depart from her, and yet no mischief 
follow: he shall be surely punished, according 
as the woman’s husband will lay upon him; and 
he shall pay as the judges determine; Deu. 
xxii. 19: As bee eh oolit ayns keead shekel dy 
argid, as ver ad shen da ayr y ven aeg. And 
they shall amerce him in an hundred shekels of 
silver, and give them unto the father of the 
damsel.  
261 
O 
 
oollee or oolee, a. guilty, chargeable with 
crime.  
oolleeid, s. guiltiness, conviction of guilt.  
oonl* or oonlee, v. ablute, wash; -agh, 77; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha n’oonl* or n’oonlee, v. not ablute or 
wash; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. O  
doonlee, v. did ablute or wash. O. 
goonlagh or goonlaghey, v. abluting 
washing. O 
dy oonlaghey, v. to wash the body or parts 
thereof.  
er n’oonlaghey, v. hath, &c. abluted or 
washed. O  
oonlit, 85. abluted, washed, eluted.  
oonley, s. m. an ablution, a lavation; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn]. 
oonlaghyn, s. pl. ablutions, lavations; 
ooanlaghyn (washings), Heb. ix. 10: Yn 
chirveish cheddin va shassoo ny lomarcan 
ayns bee as jough, as ymmodee ooanlaghyn 
as oardaghyn foalley, kianlt orroo derrey 
imbagh yn stayd noa. Which stood only in 
meats and drinks, and divers washings, and 
carnal ordinances, imposed on them until the 
time of reformation.  
oonlee, a. d. of abluting or washing the 
body.  
oonleyder, s. m. an abluter; pl. -yn.  
oor, a. fresh, not salt.  
s’oor, a. how fresh.  
s’oorey, comp. and sup. O 
oorey, a. pl. fresh, not salt.  
oor* or ooree, v. freshen, make fresh; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
cha n’oor* or n’ooree, v. not refresh or 
freshen; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. O  
dooree, v. did refresh, or refreshed.  
gooragh or gooraghey, v. refreshing, 
freshening. O 
dy ooraghey, v. to refresh or freshen.  
er n’ooraghey, v. hath, &c. refreshed. O  
oorit, 85. refreshed, freshened.  
ooree, a. d. of refreshing or freshening.  
ooreyder, s. m. a refresher; pl. -yn.  
ooridagh or ooriltagh, s. m. refreshment.  
ooriltagh, a. 
s’ooriltagh, a. how freshening or 
refreshing. O 
s’ooriltee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. O 
oor, s. f. an hour; pl -aghyn or -yn.  
e hoor, s. her hour; pl. -yn. O 
noorey vie ort, adv. the good hour, the 
good hour to die, or the good earth on thee  
ooreyder-greiney, s. m. a sun-dial.  
ooyl, s. f. an apple; pl. -yn.  
e hooyl, s. her apple. O 
ooyley, a. pl. [??] apple, apples.  
ooylagh, a. d. of apples.  
orçh, s. f. orts, refuse; Lam. iii. 45: T’ou er 
n’yannoo shin myr jeelym, as orch mastey’n 
pobble. Thou hast made us as the offscouring 
and refuse in the midst of the people. 
orçh, v. idem; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
dy orçhal, v. to make orts.  
orçhit, 85. made orts or refuse of.  
ordaag, s. f. a thumb; pl. -yn.  
ordaag-chass, s. f. a great toe; pl. 
ordaagyn-cass.  
ordaagagh, a. clumsy in the fingers; a. d. 
of the thumb or thumbs.  
orraghey, s. m. a shot. Generally applied to 
the shot of an arrow; as, orraghey sidey; pl. 
69 [orraghyn].  
osn* or osnee, v. sigh; -agh, 77; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha n’osn* or n’osnee, v. not sigh. O  
dosnee, v. did sigh, sighed, sobbed. O. 
gosnagh or gosnaghey, v. 61. sighing. O 
dy osnaghey, v. to sigh or sob.  
er n’osnaghey, v. hath, &c. sighed. O  
osnit, 85. sighed; as, t[’]eh osnit ass (he is 
sighed out).  
osney, s. m. a sigh or sob.  
osnee, a. d. of a sigh or sob.  
osneyder, s. m. one who sighs or sobs; pl. 
-yn.  
ostyl, s. m. apostle, disciple; pl. -[l]yn.  
e hostyl, s. her apostle; pl. -yn. O 
ostyllagh, a. apostolic.  
s’ostylagh, a. apostolic. O 
s’ostylee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. O 
ostyllys, s. m. apostleship.  
262 
O 
 
oural, s. m. a sacrifice, an offering; pl. -yn.  
e houral, s. her sacrifice or offering. O 
ouralley 
dy ouralley, v. to offer sacrifice.  
er n’ouralley, v. hath, &c. sacrificed O  
ourallagh, a. d. sacrificial, of a sacrifice.  
ourys, s. f. suspicion; drogh-ourys (suspicion 
of ill).  
meeourys, s. m. insuspicion. 
gourys, v. suspecting, surmising, guessing. 
O 
ouryssagh, a. suspicious, suspecting; s. m. 
a suspicious person; pl. 71 [change -agh to 
-ee].  
s’ouryssagh, how suspicious. O 
s’ouryssee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. O 
ouw, s. f. the herb, marsh penny wort. Said to 
be injurious to sheep that eat it. Prov. “Cha 
nee tra ta’n cheyrrey gee yn ouw te çheet 
r’ee.” [It is not when the sheep eats the 
marsh pennywort that it comes to her, i.e., 
the evil effects do not appear till after.] 
ouyr, a. dun, a dun colour.  
s’ouyr, a. how dun. O 
s’ouyrey, a. id. comp. and sup. O 
ouyragh, a. dunnish, dull, gloomy.  
ow 
yn ow, s. the howe.  
oyr, s. m. cause, reason, motive, occasion; pl. 
-yn.  
e hoyr, s. her cause or motive; pl. -yn. O 
er-yn-oyr, conj. because, on the cause. 
gyn-oyr, adv. without cause. 
263 
P 
 
P 
For its sound, see Remark 24 and 25. This 
letter like c and g, goes over the same words 
twice, to have the aspirate h in them.  
*** The words preceding [viz. pa- to pe-], 
under this letter, and those subsequent to 
the word phynnodderee, would here all 
change from p to ph, but to avoid so much 
repetition a few only are given as examples. 
The verbs are all given; the preterit of each 
could not be shown without their insertion.  
 
paa or paagh, a. thirsty, athirst. The first is 
used in common conversation and in 
poetry, the latter in scripture.  
s’paa or s’paagh, a. how thirsty, first 
comp. and sup. P 
ro phaa or phaagh, a. too thirsty. P 
paays, s. f. thirst; -syn.  
e phaays, s. his thirst.  
nyn baays, s. your, &c., thirst; Hag. i. 6: 
…ta shiu giu, agh cha vel shiu er chuir nyn 
baays. …ye drink, but ye are not filled with 
drink. P 
paag, s. f. a kiss; pl. -yn.  
nyn baag, s. your &c., kiss; pl. -yn. P 
paag, v. kiss; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
phaag, v. did kiss or kissed; -agh; -ee; -in; 
-ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. P  
paagey, v. kissing, salute by joining lips.  
paagit, 85. kissed.  
s’paagit, a. how kissed. P 
paageyder, s. m. one who kisses.  
yn phaageyder, s. the kisser. P 
Paaie, s. f. Peggy.  
Phaaie, s. Peggy, voc. case. P 
paal, s. f. a pen, a coop; pl. -yn.  
paard or paart, v. part, depart; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
cha baart, would, &c., not part; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms, 94, 158. P  
phaart or phaard, v. did part, or depart; 
-agh; -ee; -in; -ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. 
P  
paardail or paartail, v. parting with, 
departing. 
er baartail, hath, &c., departed. P 
paardit, 85. expired, departed. 
paart, s. m. some, part, part of. 
nyn baart, s. your, &c., part. 
aart-ny-paart, lot nor part. 
pabyr, s. m. paper; pl. -yn.  
nyn babyr, s. your, &c., paper; pl. -yn. P 
pabyrey, a. pl. [??] paper, a. d. of paper.  
pabyr-craitnagh, s. parchment. 
pabyr, v. paper; -agh, 77; -ee; 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
phabyr, v. did paper or papered; -agh; -ee; 
-in; -ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. P  
pabyral, v. papering.  
pabyrit, 85. papered. 
s’pabyrit, a. how papered. P 
pabyreyder, s. m. a paperer; pl. -yn. 
padjer, s. f. prayer; pl. -yn. 
nyn badjer, s. your, &c. prayer; pl. -yn. P 
padjeragh, a. d. of prayer. 
paggad, s. m. a packet; pl. -yn.  
paggan, s. f. a cloth used under a child, a 
double; pl. -yn. 
paggey, s. m. a pack; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
pairk, s. m. a park; pl. -yn. 
paitçhey, s. m. a child; pl. 69 [change -ey to 
-yn]. 
nyn baitçhey, s. our, &c., child; pl. 69. P 
paitçhagh, a. childish. 
paitt, s. f. pest, pestilence, plague. 
paittagh, a. pestilential, plaguy. 
paittoil (sic: stress), a. pestilent, 
pestiferous. 
s’paittoil (sic: stress), a. how pestilential, 
comp. and sup. P 
palçhey, s. m. plenty; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
nyn balçhey, s. your, &c., plenty; pl. 69 
(sic) [change -ey to -yn]. P 
palçhey, a. plentiful, plenteous.  
s’palçhey, a. how plentious or plentiful, 
comp. and sup. P 
dy palçhey, adv. plentifully, copiously. 
slane palçhey, s. abundance; 1 Chro. xxix. 
21: As heb ad ourallyn gys y Chiarn, as 
ourallyn-losht er laa-ny-vairagh, eer thousane 
264 
P 
 
dow, as thousane rea, as thousane eayn, 
marish nyn ourallyn-feeyney as ourallyn elley 
ayns slane palchey, son ooilley Israel. And 
they sacrificed sacrifices unto the Lord, and 
offered burnt offerings unto the Lord, on the 
morrow after that day, even a thousand 
bullocks, a thousand rams, and a thousand 
lambs, with their drink offerings, and sacrifices 
in abundance for all Israel. 
palçhid or palçhys, s. f. plenteousness; 1 
Sam. xxv. 6: As myr shoh nee shiu gra rishyn 
ta beaghey ayns palchys, Shee dy row ort 
hene, as shee dy row gys dty hie, as shee da 
ooilley ny t'ayd. And thus shall ye say to him 
that liveth in prosperity, Peace be both to thee, 
and peace be to thine house, and peace be 
unto all that thou hast.  
pandoogh, v. panting, pant; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
phandoogh, v. did pant or panted; -agh; 
-ee; -in; -ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. P 
panney, s. m. a pan; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
pannys, s. f. penance; pl. -syn. 
nyn banys, s. your, &c., penance; pl. -syn. 
P  
papan, s. m. a pope; pl. -yn. 
papanagh, a. papistical, popish; s. m. a 
papist; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]. 
papanys, s. f. popery. 
parane, s. f. a wild parsnip; pl. -yn. 
pardoon, s. m. pardon, forgiveness; pl. -yn. 
nyn bardoon, s. your, &c. pardon. 
pardoon, v. pardon, remit; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
phardoon, v. did pardon or pardoned; 
-agh; -ee; -in; -ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. 
P  
pardooney, v. pardoning, forgiving. 
pardoonit, 85. pardoned, forgiven. 
s’pardoonit, a. how pardoned. P 
pardooneyder, s. m. a pardoner; pl. -yn. 
pargys, s. m. paradise; pl. -yn. 
nyn bargys, s. your, &c., paradise. P  
parick, s. f. a small lobster; pl. -yn. Prov. “Ta 
daa pharick jannoo un ghimmagh.” [Two 
small lobsters make a large one.] P  
Parick, s. m. Patrick. 
un Pharick, s. m. one Patrick. 
duillag Pharick, s. f. plantain. 
Parlane, s. m. Bartholomew. The festival of 
this saint is kept on the 24th of August. 
Prov. “Laa’l Parlane, 
daa honn goll sy nane.” [St. 
Bartholomew’s Day, two waves going in 
one.] 
partan, s. f. a crab; pl. -yn. 
croag-partan, s. f. water seagrum; crab’s 
claws. [?l. croag-phartan] 
parteays, s. m. f. a partner; pl. -syn. 
nyn baarteays, s. your, &c. partner. P  
pash, s. f. an earthen pan, a panmug, a 
potsherd; Pro. xxvi. 23: Ta meillyn shliawn 
lesh cree olkyssagh, myr pash craie coodit lesh 
trustyr dy argid. Burning lips and a wicked heart 
are like a potsherd covered with silver dross. 
pasheyder, s. m. a potter; pl. -yn. 
patrag, s. f. a partridge; pl. -yn. 
peajeog, s. m. f. a niggard, a miser; pl. -yn. 
peajeogagh, a. niggardly. 
s’peajeogagh, a. how miserly or niggardly. 
P 
s’peajeogee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. P 
peajeogys, s. f. niggardliness. 
peamad, s. m. a pavement; pl. -yn. 
peccah, s. m. sin; pl. peccaghyn. 
nyn beccah, s. your, &c. sin. 
peccagh, s. m. a sinner; pl. 71 [change -agh 
to -ee]. 
yn pheccagh, s. the sinner. This word and 
its radical are often used for person; as Jer. 
xliii. 6: Eer deiney, as mraane, as cloan, as 
inneenyn y ree, as dy chooilley pheccagh daag 
Nebuzaradan captan y ghard, marish Gedaliah 
mac Ahikam… Even men, and women, and 
children, and the king’s daughters, and every 
person that Nebuzaradan the captain of the 
guard had left with Gedaliah the son of 
Ahikam… , and Acts, xiii. 11: As chelleeragh 
huitt kay as dorraghys er; as hie eh mygeayrt 
râsey shirrey peccagh dy gholl ny chione. And 
immediately there fell on him a mist and a 
darkness; and he went about seeking some to 
lead him by the hand. It is generally sounded 
265 
P 
 
as if written phy’agh, and the radical 
py’agh. P 
nyn beccagh, s. m. your, &c. sinner. P 
py’agh or p’agh, s. m. a person. No doubt 
this is a contraction or a corruption of 
peccagh (a sinner), which see; it is used in 
common talk, and with some propriety 
when in opposition to baagh, as py’agh ny 
baagh.  
peccoil, a. sinful, wicked, vile. 
s’peccoil, a. how sinful, comp. and sup. P 
peccoillys, s. f. sinfulness. 
Peddyr, s. m. Peter. In general improperly 
pronounced peedyr, the Manks of pewter. 
bossan Pheddyr, s. m. Peter’s wort. 
peeaghane, s. a stuffing of the breath 
passage, a hoarseness, dyspnoea. 
peeaghanagh or peeaghanit, a. stuffed up 
in the breath passage, so as not to be able to 
speak above the breath, hoarse. 
s’peeaghanit, a. how unable to speak 
above the breath. P 
peeagheree, s. caterwauling or cat rutting. 
peedyr, s. m. pewter; pl. -yn. 
peedyragh, a. d. of pewter. 
peegagh, s. m. a large skate or ray fish, a 
thornback; pl. -yn. 
peeikear, s. m. a spy, a descrier; pl. -yn. 
peeikearagh, v. spying, descrying, prying.  
peeikearys, s. f. the craft or business of a 
spy. 
peek, s. f. the top of a gable. 
peeley, s. f. (from pill [deest]), a fortress, a 
pile or tower; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
peeoge, s. f. a puny, petty, tiny thing; pl. -yn. 
peesh, s. f. piece, part of the whole; pl. -yn. 
peesh, v. to put pieces together; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80. -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. We could well do without this 
word. See meer.  
pheesh, v. did piece or pieced; -agh; -ee; 
-in; -ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. P 
pell, s. m. the prominence of the belly. 
pellag, s. f. a small division of something, 
generally applied to the division of a cart 
load, in small heaps or parts; pl. -yn. 
pelt, s. m. the felt or skin; pl. -yn. 
penn ‘pen’ 
skynn-phenney, s. f. a pen-knife; Jer. 
xxxvi. 23: As haink eh gy-kione, tra va Jehudi 
er lhaih three ny kiare dy ghuilliagyn, dy yiare 
yn ree eh lesh skynn-phenney, as cheau eh 
‘syn aile eh va er y chollagh, derrey va ooilley 
yn lioar losht ‘syn aile va er y chollagh. And it 
came to pass, that when Jehudi had read three 
or four leaves, he cut it with the penknife, and 
cast it into the fire that was on the hearth, until 
all the roll was consumed in the fire that was on 
the hearth. 
perkin, s. m. a prater, an impertinent, saucy 
fellow, a pragmatic; pl. -yn; Ecclesiasticus, 
xx. 8: Ver sleih feoh da’n perkin: as bee 
dwoaie oc ersyn ta goaill rouyr taggloo er. He 
that useth many words shall be abhorred; and 
he that taketh to himself authority therein shall 
be hated. 
perkinagh, a. prating, pratling in matters 
not concerned in, pragmatical. 
perkinys, s. f. prate, pragmaticalness. 
perkyn, s. f. a porpoise, a herring-hog, pl. 72 
[change -yn to -eeyn]. Yn pherkyn wooar 
(the great sea or herring-hog). 
pern ‘reel’ 
gailley-pern, s. m. a fish which I do not 
know the English name of. [anglerfish, 
devilfish, frogfish] 
perree, s. m. a short jacket without a tail; pl. 
-yn. 
persoon, s. m. a person; pl. -yn. 
nyn bersoon, s. your, &c. person. P 
persoonagh, adv. in person, personally.  
pesmad, s. f. a parsnip; pl. -yn.  
pesson, s. m. a rector; pl. -yn.  
pessonagh, a. d. of a rector.  
pessonys, s. f. the office of a rector.  
phadeyr, s. m. a prophet; pl. -yn. That this 
word is not initialled as it ought, see adeyr.  
e adeyr, s. m. his prophet. This word is 
from phadeyr, but ought to be from fadeyr, 
as it undergoes the changes of f, and not 
266 
P 
 
of P.  
nyn vadeyr, s. your, &c. prophet; pl. -yn; 
themselves, prophets; Acts, xv. 32: As myr 
va Judas as Silas nyn vadeyryn ad-hene, 
choyrlee ad ny braaraghyn lesh ymmodee 
goan, as hickyree ad [ad ayns nyn gredjue]. 
And Judas and Silas, being prophets also 
themselves, exhorted the brethren with many 
words, and confirmed them. Ph 
phadeyr-ben, s. f. a prophetess.  
phadeyragh, a. d. of a prophet.  
phadeyrys, s. m. prophecy.  
e adeyrys, s. his, &c. See phadeyrys. F  
phynnodderee, s. m. a satyr; Isa. xxxiv. 14: 
Hig beishtyn oaldey yn assagh dy cheilley 
marish beishtyn oaldey yn ellan, as nee yn 
phynodderee gyllagh da e heshey. The wild 
beasts of the desert shall also meet with the 
wild beasts of the island, and the satyr shall cry 
to his fellow. That this word stands precisely 
in the same predicament as the word 
phadeyr, there can be no doubt; derived 
from fynney (hair or fur), and oashyr or 
oashyree (of stockings or hose); the name 
seems to imply that its hair or fur is its 
covering.  
pian, s. m. (sounded peean), pain; pl. -yn. I 
think that this word is nothing more than a 
corruption of the English, and could be well 
dispensed with. See guin.  
nyn bian, s. your, &c. pain. P 
phian, v. did pain or pained; -agh; -ee; -in; 
-ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. P  
pianey, v. paining. 
pianit or piant, 85. pained. 
s’piant, how pained. P 
piandagh, a. painful; s. m. a person in pain; 
pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
s’piandagh, a. how painful. P 
s’piandee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. P 
pibbin, s. f. a puffin; pl. -yn. 
nyn bibbin, s. your, &c. puffin. P  
pibbyr, s. m. pepper; pl. -yn. 
nyn bibbyr, s. your, &c. pepper. P 
pibbyragh, a. d. of pepper. 
bossan pepyragh, s. m. pepperwort, 
dittander. 
phibbyr, v. did pepper or peppered; -agh; 
-ee; -in; -ins: -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. P 
pick s. f. a pick-axe.  
nyn bick, s. your, &c. pick-axe. P  
pick s. f. pitch; Isa. xxxiv. 9: As bee ny 
strooanyn eck chyndaït gys pick, as y joan eck 
gys brimstone, as hig y thalloo eck dy ve pick-
loshtee. And the streams thereof shall be 
turned into pitch, and the dust thereof into 
brimstone, and the land thereof shall become 
burning pitch.  
nyn bick, s. your, &c. pitch. P 
pick-hallooin, s. f. slime, bitumen. 
pieanat, s. f. a magpie; pl. -yn or the -at 
changed to -ee. 
piggyl, s. f. pickle; pl. -yn. 
pihtt, s. f. a woman’s privity. 
pillagh, s. m. a pillow; Ez. xiii. 18: Smerg da 
ny mraane ta whaalley pillaghyn [obbee] fo 
dagh uillin, as jannoo reddyn [obbee] son king 
jeh dy chooilley eash, dy chleayney anmeenyn! 
Woe to the women that sew pillows to all 
armholes, and make kerchiefs upon the head of 
every stature to hunt souls!; pl. -yn.  
pin or pinn*, s. f. a peg;. Ez. xv. iii: Vod y 
fuygh echey ve goit son obbyr erbee? ny, jean 
deiney jannoo pin jeh dy chroghey saagh 
erbee er? Shall wood be taken thereof to do 
any work? or will men take a pin of it to hang 
any vessel thereon?; pl. -aghyn. 
ping, s. f. a penny; pl. -yn. 
nyn bing, s. your, &c. penny. P 
lus y daa phing, s. f. money-wart, the herb 
twopence. 
piob, s. a pipe, flute; pl. -yn. 
pirragh, s. f. a species of gull, pinquin; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
pishag, s. f. a spell, conjuration. 
pishagagh, a. incantatory, magical. 
s’pishagagh, a. how much for spells or 
charms. 
s’pishagee, [a.] id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. P 
pishagys, s. f. magic, enchantment. 
pisheyragh, v. whispering. 
pishin, s. m. a kitten; pl. -yn, or 72 [change 
-in to -eeyn]. 
267 
P 
 
pishyr, s. f. peas or pease; pl. -yn. 
nyn bishyr, s. your, &c. pease. P 
pishyragh, a. d. of peas. 
piyr, s. f. a pair, a couple; pl. -yn. 
nyn biyr, s. your, &c. pair. P 
piyr, v. pair; -agh, 77; -al, 79, or -ey, 82; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. 
phiyr, v. did pair or paired; -agh; -ee; -in; 
-ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. P 
piyrit, 85. paired, coupled. 
s’piyrit, a. how paired. P 
plaase, s. f. a palace; pl. -yn.  
nyn blaase, s. our, &c. palace. P  
plaastyr, s. m. plaster; pl. -yn.  
plaastr* or plaastree, v. plaster; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. 
phla[a]styr, v. did plaster, &c.; -agh; -ee; 
-in; -ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. P  
plaastrail, v. plastering. 
plaastrit, 85. plastered. 
s’plaastrit, a. how plastered. P 
plaastreyder, s. m. a plasterer; pl. -yn. 
plaggad, s. m. oats, from the time it is in ear 
till threshed, has a right to be so called. It is 
always corkey, but not sheel till threshed 
and winnowed.  
plaiynt, s. complaint; pl. -yn. 
nyn blaiynt, s. your, &c. complaint. P 
plaiynt, v. complain; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
phlaiynt, v. did complain, &c.; -agh; -ee; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -it; -yms; -ys, 94. P 
plaiyntit, 85. complained. 
s’plaiyntit, a. how complained of. P 
plaiyntagh, s. m. a complainer; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. 
pleat, s. m. prate, prattle, talk. Prov. “Boayl 
ta gioee ta keck, as boayl ta mraane ta 
pleat.” [Where there are geese there is dirt, 
and where there are women there is prattle.]  
pleat, v. idem; -agh; 77; -ee; 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha blead, v. not plead; -agh; -ee; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys. P 
phlead, v. did plead or talk, &c.; -agh; -ee; 
-in; -ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. P  
pleateil or pleatey, v. pleading, pratling, 
talking, prating. 
pleateyder, s. m. a pleader, or prater. 
pleatit, 85. talked. 
pleadeilys, s. discourse, joint talk. 
ploogh, v. smother, stifle; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
cha bloogh, v. not smother or stifle; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms. P 
phloogh, v. did smother or stifle, &c.; 
-agh; -ee; -in; -ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. 
P 
plooghit, 85. smothered, stifled, suffocated. 
plooghey 
plooghee 
gorley-plooghee, s. the quinsy. 
ploogheyder, s. m. a smotherer; pl. -yn. 
plooghane, s. f. a suffocating fume. 
plooghanit 
s’plooghanit, a. how suffocated. P 
plooghanagh 
s’plooghanagh, a. how suffocating. P 
s’plooghanee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. 
P 
pluck, v. 
cha bluck, v. not pull or pluck; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms. P 
phluck, v. did pluck or pull; -agh; -ee; -in; 
-ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. P 
pluckit 
s’pluckit, a. how pulled. P 
poagey, s. m. a bag; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
nyn boagey, s. your, &c., bag; pl. 67. P 
dy phoagey, v. to bag, jut, bulge or swell.  
poanrey, s. m. beans; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
nyn boanrey, s. your, &c. beans. P  
pobble, s. m. people, audience, population. 
nyn bobble, your, &c. people, community. 
P  
poddash, s. f. pottage; pl. -yn. 
nyn boddash, s. your, &c. pottage; pl. -yn. 
P  
podjal, s. f. a flagon, jug, urn; Isa. xxii. 24: As 
nee ad eshyn y choamrey lesh ooilley gloyr thie 
e ayrey, yn sheeloghe as yn sluight, ooilley ny 
siyn beggey, voish siyn-cappan eer gys siyn-
268 
P 
 
podjal. And they shall hang upon him all the 
glory of his father’s house, the offspring and the 
issue, all vessels of small quantity, from the 
vessels of cups, even to all the vessels of 
flagons. 
poggaid, s. f. a pocket; pl. -yn. 
poh, in. of dislike. 
pohll, s. f. a pole stone; pl. -yn. Stones 
fastened to both ends of herring nets to sink 
them when fishing. One is called pohll y 
vaatey, and the other pohll famman.  
pohll(d), v. uphold, warrant, &c.; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
cha bohlld, v. would not uphold or warrant; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms. P 
pho[h]lld, v. did uphold, &c.; -agh; -in; 
-ym; -ys, 94. P 
pohlldey or pohlldal, v. upholding, 
warranting. 
pohlldit, 85. upholden, warranted.  
s’pohllit, a. how upholded. P 
pohllder, s. m. an upholder, &c. 
pohllinagh, s. m. a mermaid, or rather a 
merman; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
pohnnar, s. m. a child grown between 
infancy and adolescence. There appears to 
be three stages before puberty, in the 
Manks language: oikan, pohnnar, and 
scollag or scoilg.  
nyn bo[h]nnar, s. your, &c, &c. boy or 
girl; pl. -yn. P  
poht, s. m. a pot; pl. poiyt.  
nyn boht, s. your, &c, &c. pot. P 
pooiyt, s. pl. pots.  
phuyt, a. d. of the pot or pots; as, cooid y 
phuyt. 
poinht, s. a lace of leather or thong; pl. -yn.  
pouint, s. pl. laces, strings, thongs. 
poinnee, a. stout, sturdy, stiff.  
poinneeid, s. m. stoutness, sturdiness.  
point or poinsh, v. appoint, bid, or order; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
cha boinsh v. 158. not appoint; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym, -yms, 94. P  
phoint or phoinsh, v. did appoint; -agh; 
&c., -ys, 94. P 
pointeil, v. appointing, bidding. 
nyn boinsheil v. your, &c. appointing. P  
pointit, 85. appointed, bidden.  
s’pointit, a. how appointed. P 
poll or pohll, v. mat, or stick together; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
pholl, v. did mat or adhere; -agh; &c. -in; 
-ym; -ys, 94. P 
polley, v. sticking together without 
weaving, as wool in a hat. 
pollit, 85. matted, stuck together. 
s’pollit, v. how matted. P 
poll or pohll, v. prune; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
pollal, v. pruning, cropping.  
pollagh, s. f. marsh parsnip.  
pollan, s. a saddle cloth, a cloth for the back 
of a horse; pl. -yn. 
nyn bollan, s. your, &c. saddle cloth. P  
polt, s. m. a blow, stroke, or thump; or 
perhaps it means the sound or report of a 
blow, shot, &c., more than the blow, &c. 
itself. 
nyn bolt, s. your, &c. knock or thump. 
ayns-polt, adv. in an instant, in as short a 
time as a blow could be given. 
polt, v. strike, &c.; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
[v.] -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. P  
pholt, v. did thump, thumped; -agh, &c.; 
-ys, 94. P 
poltal or poltey, v. striking, thumping, &c. 
poltit, 85. thumped, struck. 
s’poltit, a. how struck, or thumped. P 
polteyder, s. m. a thumper, &c.; pl. -yn. 
pontreil, s. f. a plummet; 2 Kings, xxi. 13: As 
sheeyn-yms magh harrish Jerusalem line 
towshan Samaria, as pontreil thie Ahab: as 
neem’s glenney Jerusalem myr ta claare er ny 
ghlenney, rubbey eh, as chyndaa e veeal fo. 
And I will stretch over Jerusalem the line of 
Samaria, and the plummet of the house of 
Ahab: and I will wipe Jerusalem as a man 
wipeth a dish, wiping it, and turning it upside 
down.  
269 
P 
 
pooar, s. m. power, puissance, authority; pl. 
-aghyn; vel pooar ec yn eayst[?] (does the 
moon shine[?]).  
nyn booar, s. our, &c. power; pl. -aghyn. P 
pooar-gioal, s. m. an execution.  
slane pooar, s. authority; Esther, ix. 29: 
Eisht scrieu Esther yn ven-rein, inneen Abihail, 
as Mordecai yn Ew, lesh slane pooar, dy 
choyrt ayns bree yn screeuyn elley shoh son 
Purim. Then Esther the queen, the daughter of 
Abihail, and Mordecai the Jew, wrote with all 
authority, to confirm this second letter of Purim. 
pooaral, a. powerful, mighty, puissant.  
pooaragh, a. d. of power or might.  
s’pooaragh, a. how powerful or mighty. P 
s’pooaral, a. id., comp. and sup. This 
change in the termination is contrary to the 
general rule. 
pooar, s. m. token, warrant; pl. -yn. 
poodyr, s. m. powder; pl. -yn.  
nyn boodyr, s. your, &c. powder; pl. -yn. P  
poodyr or poodyree, v. powder or dust; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
cha boodyragh, 185. would, &c. not 
powder; -in; -ins; -y[m]; -y[s]. P  
phoodyr, v. did powder, powdered; -agh, 
&c.; -ys, 94. P 
poodyral, v. powdering. 
poodyrit, 85. powdered, dusted. 
pooishee, s. f. a posy, a flower. 
poos or poose, v. marry, wed, wive; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
cha boose, v. not marry; -agh;-in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94.  
phoose, v. did marry, married; -agh; -in; 
-ym; -ys, 94. P 
poosey,v. marrying, wedding. 
poost, 85. married, wedded. 
s’poost, a. how married or wedded. P 
ben-phoost, s. f. a married woman, a wife. 
poosey, s. m. a marriage, a wedding; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn]. 
nyn boosey, your, &c. pl. boosaghyn, 
marriages. P  
brishey-poosey, s. m. adultery, a breach of 
marriage. 
dooinney-poost, s. m. a married man, a 
husband. 
poosee, a. d. of marriage, matrimonial, 
conjugal. 
ben-phoosee, s. f. a bride. 
dooinney-poosee, a bridegroom. 
pooseyder, s. m. one who marries. 
pootçh, s. a pouch; pl. -yn. 
pootçhagh, a. poutish, sullen, sulky.  
pootçhid, s. m. sullenness, sulkiness. 
possan, s. m. a parcel. Generally applied to 
sheep. 
nyn bossan, s. your, &c. parcel. P  
postyr, s. f. a scold, a bully; Ecclesiasticus 
xxvi. 27: Bee briaght foddey as gerrit jeant 
son postyr dy ven veeallagh, ee hene ver 
scaalhean er nyn noidyn. A loud crying woman 
and a scold shall be sought out to drive away 
the enemies. 
poyll, s. f. puddle, pool. 
puill, s. pl. pools, puddles; pl. of poyll.  
poyll sluggee, s. f. a whirlpool.  
prash, s. m. brass; pl. -yn. 
prashey, a. d. of brass, brazen. 
prasheyder, s. m. a brazier; pl. -yn. 
prashit, 85. brazed, lined with brass. 
prayll, v. pray, praying. I have inserted this 
word although not without an objection. 
See conclusion of introduction, page 15. 
[‘The verb to pray occurs above two 
hundred times in the English Scriptures; yet 
the translators have not once used that 
mongrel word, PRAYLL, or its parent, 
PRAYAL (see Remark 79), which, and the 
like, are now generally used without 
reserve. I do not, however, allude to the 
Clergy, who, to their credit, always say 
GOAILL PADJER, EC PADJER, JANNOO PADJER, 
&c.’] 
preaçh, v. preach, publish a religious oration. 
cha breaçh, v. not preach; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms, 84. P  
phreaçh, v. did preach; &c. -ys, 94. P 
preaçheil, v. preaching. 
nyn breaçheil, v. your, &c. preaching. P  
preaçhit, 85. preached. 
preaçhoor, s. m. a preacher; pl. -yn. 
270 
P 
 
nyn breaçhoor, s. your, &c. preacher; pl. 
-yn. P  
preis or preays, s. f. pressure of business; 
Mark, ix. 25: Tra honnick Yeesey dy row yn 
pobble ayns preis chionney dy cheilley, vaggyr 
eh er y spyrryd neu-ghlen… When Jesus saw 
that the people came running together, he 
rebuked the foul spirit…. 
preissal, <v.> [a.] pressing. 
s’preisal, a. how pressing or busy. P 
premee, s. f. a necessary or privy. 
prindeys (sic: stress), s. m. f. an apprentice; 
pl. -syn. 
nyn brendeys (sic: stress), your, &c. 
apprentice; pl. -syn. P  
prinjeig, s. f. paunch, the belly tripe; pl. -yn. 
prios, s. m. price; Gal. pl. -yn.  
prise, s. f. a fulcrum; pl. -yn. 
pris<e>, v. raise by lever on a fulcrum; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ym, 86; -ys, 88.  
prisal, v. raising by lever and fulcrum. 
prisit, 85. raised by lever. 
prow, v. prove, try, evince; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym; 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
cha brow, v. not prove; -agh, 77, &c. P  
phrow, v. did prove, try or experience, 
proved; -agh; -in; -ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 
94. P  
prowal, v. proving, trying, deposing. 
dy phrowal, v. to prove, to depose, or 
swear on oath. P  
prowit or prowt, 85. proved, deposed, 
tried. 
s’prowit, a. how proved or sworn, how 
experienced. P 
prowal, s. m. proof, experience, deposition; 
pl. -yn. 
nyn browal, s. your, &c. proof or proving; 
pl. -yn. P  
prowaltagh, s. m. a prover, a deposer; pl. 
71 [change -agh to -ee].  
yn phrowaltagh, s. the prover or deposer. P 
nyn browaltagh, s. your, &c. deponent or 
deposer; pl. 71. P  
prowaltys, a. probatory, probationary. 
prowalys, s. f. probation, trial. 
prugh, v. hoard; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ym, 86; -ys, 88. 
prughit, 85. hoarded.  
prughag, s. m. a hoarder, a miser; pl. -yn. 
Prov. “Tasht prug[h]ag as ee lughag.” 
[Store miser and eat mouse.] 
 
pryssoon, s. m. a prison. 
nyn brysoon, s. your, &c. prison. 
pryssoon, v. imprison; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha brysoon, v. [not imprison;] -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms, 94. P  
phryssoon, v. did imprison or incarcerate; 
-agh, &c.; -ys, 94. P 
pryssooney, v. imprisoning. 
pryssooneyder, s. m. one who imprisons. 
pryssoonit, 85. imprisoned. 
s’pryssoonit, a. how imprisoned. P 
pryssoonagh, s. m. a prisoner; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
nyn brysoonagh, s. your, &c. prisoner; pl. 
71. P  
puckler, s. m. a snug farmer on a small farm. 
puddase, s. f. a potato; pl. -yn. 
nyn buddase, s. your, &c. potato; pl. -yn. P  
puht or puit, v. push; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms 87; -ys, 88. 
phutt, v. did push, &c.; -agh, &c.; -ys, 94. 
P 
puhtey v. pushing. 
puhtit, 85. pushed. 
puhteyder, s. m. a pusher.  
puhttagh or puittagh, a. pushing, apt to 
push. 
tarroo-puhttagh, s. m. a pushing bull. 
puiddihn, s. f. pudding; pl. puiddeeyn. 
puihe, in. away cow, begone cow.  
puiss, s. f. a cheek; pl. -yn.  
nyn buiss, s. your, &c. cheek. P 
puss, s. f. cheek. See also puiss; pl. -yn. 
puss, v. puff; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
pussal or pussey, v. getting swelled in the 
cheeks with choler. 
pussagh, a. having fat or chubbed cheeks, 
choleric, puffy. 
271 
P 
 
pundaig, s. f. a hard stem of grass; pl. -yn.  
pundaigagh, a. having hard stems.  
pundail, s. a pinfold or pound. 
nyn bundail (sic: stress), s. our, &c. 
pinfold; pl. -yn. P  
pundail, v. impound; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
phundail, v. did impound, &c.; -agh; -in; 
-ym; -ys, 94. P 
pundailit, 85. impounded. 
pundaileyder, s. m. an impounder; pl. -yn. 
punt, s. m. a pound, 20 shillings; pl. see 
puint. 
puint, s. pl. pounds; pl. of punt. 
nyn buint, s. your, &c. pounds.  
punt, s. m. a small yawl or boat; pl. -yn. 
purt s. f. port, harbour, haven. The best pl. of 
this word is puirt, but in scripture it is 
purtyn.  
nyn burt, s. your, &c. port, harbour. P  
puirt, s. pl. harbours, ports, havens.  
nyn buirht, your, &c. ports, &c. P 
purtey, a. d. of a port or harbour.  
leeideilagh purtey, s. m. a pilot. 
Purt-Noo-Moirrey, s. Port St. Mary. This 
safe and excellent harbour, which has been 
greatly improved of late years by the 
building of a new quay, no doubt took its 
name from a Catholic Chapel which 
formerly stood adjacent thereto, called St. 
Mary’s, now razed from the foundation.  
Purt-ny-Hinshey or Innysey, s. Peel, 
literally, the harbour of the Island —the 
town and harbour of Peel. Some say that 
this word is derived from ny hinshley, (the 
low situation); others from ny ynsee (the 
seat of the literate): but it is obviously from 
inch or innys (an island), the genitive article 
ny changes inch to hinch and [-]ey; in that 
case, the harbour of the Peel Island.  
Purt-Sheearan or Sheear ayn, s. Port 
Erin, the most western port or harbour of 
the Island, now generally called Port Iron.  
beeal y phurt (the entrance into the 
harbour) 
py, s. f. a pie; pl. -aghyn.  
pyht, in. pshaw, of contempt. 
pyle, s. f. a sharp pointed iron or ferrule or an 
arrow, an emeroid; pl. -yn. 
pynjouiryn, s. pl. pincers. 
pynt, s. m. a pint; pl. -yn. 
pynteraght, v. pinting, drinking pints. 
pyshoon, s. m. poison; pl. -yn. 
pyshoon, v. poison; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
pyshooney, v. poisoning. 
nyn byshooney, v. hath, &c. them 
poisoned. P 
pyshoonit, 85. poisoned. 
s’pyshoonit, a. how poisoned. P 
pyshoonagh, a. poisonous, pernicious. 
pyshooneyder, s. m. one who poisons. 
272 
Q 
 
Q 
This letter for its sound see Remark 26, and 
for its changes see 54, 159, and 160.  
quaagh, a. gruff, sour, torvous, morose, 
sullen, sulky, estranged, alien; Psl. lxix. 8: 
Ta mee myr dooinney joarree da my 
vraaraghyn: dy jarroo myr fer-quaagh da cloan 
my vayrey. I am become a stranger unto my 
brethren: even an alien unto my mother’s 
children.  
s’quaagh, a. how gruff, sullen or morose, 
how strange or aliened. Q 
s’quaaie, a. id. comp. and sup. Q 
quaaghey, v. getting gruff or gloomy.  
quoie or quaine, s. (from quaagh) 
estranged, alien people, strange people.  
quaail, v. to meet, to confront on meeting.  
my whail, v. to meet me. Q 
nyn guail, v. to meet us; Gen. xxiv. 6[5]: 
Quoi yn dooinney shoh ta ayns y vagher shooyl 
nyn guail? What man is this that walketh in the 
field to meet us? Q  
nyn gwaill, v. to meet us. See also guail. 
Psalm cxlv. 5, Manks metre:  
Yn Chiarn t’eh dooie as myghinagh, 
Arryltagh dy hauail, 
E chorree shooyl lesh kesmad moal 
E vyghin cheet nyn gwaill. 
[The Lord is kind and merciful, 
Willing to save, 
His wrath walks with a tardy step 
His mercy comes to meet us. MWW] Q 
qualtey, v. meeting, coming face to face. 
er whailtey, v. hath, &c. met. Q 
qualtit, 85. met, assembled. 
quaaltagh or qualtagh, s. m. one who 
meets; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]. Pro. 
xvii. 12: Lhig da muc-awin t’er choayl e 
quallianyn ve quaaltagh dooinney, roish 
ommydan ayns farg. Let a bear robbed of her 
whelps meet a man, rather than a fool in his 
folly. Hos. xiii. 8: Ver-ym quaaltagh daue myr 
y vuc-awin ta er choayl e quallianyn, as raip-ym 
skairt y chree oc. I will meet them as a bear 
that is bereaved of her whelps, and will rend 
the caul of their heart. The first person met 
on New Year’s Day, or on going on some 
new work, &c. A company of young lads or 
men, generally went in old times on what 
they termed the qualtagh, at Christmas or 
New Year’s Day to the house of their more 
wealthy neighbours; some one of the 
company repeating in an audible voice the 
following rhyme:— 
“Ollick ghennal erriu as bleïn feer vie,  
Seihll as slaynt da’n slane lught thie. 
Bea as gennallys eu bio ry-cheilley,  
Shee as graih eddyr mraane as deiney. 
Cooid as cowryn, stock as stoyr. 
Palçhey phuddase, as skaddan dy-liooar. 
Arran as caashey, eeym as roayrt. 
Baase, myr lugh, ayns uhllin ny soalt. 
Cadley sauçhey tra vees shiu ny lhie,  
As feeackle y jargan, nagh bee dy mie.”  
[A merry Christmas on ye, and a very good 
year, 
Long life and health to the whole 
household. 
Your life and mirth living together, 
Peace and love between women and men. 
Goods and wealth, stock and store, 
Plenty potatoes and enough herring. 
Bread and cheese, butter and beef, 
Death, like a mouse, in the stackyard of the 
barn. 
Sleeping safely when you lie, 
and the flea’s tooth, may it not be well.] 
When this was repeated, they were then 
invited in to partake of the best that the 
house could afford. 
yn whaaltagh, s. the meeter. Q 
nyn guaaltagh, s. your, &c. meeter. Q 
quaaltys or qualtys, s. f. a meeting, an 
interview; Psl. lxxxv. 10: Ta myghin as 
firrinys er choyrt qualtys d’y cheilley: ta cairys 
as shee er phaagey yn derrey yeh yn jeh elley. 
Mercy and truth are met together: 
righteousness and peace have kissed each 
other.  
quaiyl, s. m. a court, a place where justice 
or judgment is administered, perhaps called 
so because people have to confront the 
judge or one another; pl. -yn.  
yn whaiyll, s. the court; pl. -yn. Q  
nyn guaiyl, s. your, &c. court. Q 
ard-quaiyl 
ard whuaiyl, s. the council. Though this 
spelling is made use of, I think it better 
273 
Q 
 
written whaiyl, which see. Q  
Quaiyl-Ardreiltagh, s. m. the chancery 
court. This has no doubt been corrupted to 
what you hear Quaiyl-Andrailagh; some 
say the latter is from Quaiyl-Wandrailagh 
(the wandering court), but I prefer the first.  
Quaiyl Andrailagh, a. See Quaiyl 
Ardreiltagh. 
quaiyl-theay, s. f. the common law. 
quaallagh, a. of or belonging to a court. 
quallian, s. m. a cub, a pup or whelp; pl. -yn. 
e whuaillan, s. his pup or whelp. Q 
quallianagh, a. d. of a cub or whelp. 
Coill, s. m. a general name for a dog; as, 
Coill-voddee, a corruption of qual in 
quallian. 
queel or queeyl, s. f. a wheel; pl. -yn. 
yn whueeyl, s. the wheel. Q  
nyn gueeyl, s. your, &c. wheel. Q 
queeylagh, a. d. of a wheel or wheels. 
barrey queeylagh, s. <f.>[m.] a wheel-
barrow. 
queeyllagh, s. f. a band or bandage; pl. 72 
[change -agh to -eeyn]. This word is 
seldom used for any thing but the band of a 
sheaf; it ought to be the Manks of felloe.  
yn whueeyllagh, s. the band; pl. 72. Q 
queeyllaghey, v. binding, wheeling. 
queeyllit, 85. wheeled, bound. 
queeylleyder, s. m. a wheelwright, a 
binder. 
seyir-queeyl, s. m. a wheelwright. 
queig, a. five; pl. -yn. Latin quinque. 
yn wheig, s. the five; pl. -yn. Q 
queigoo, a. the fifth. 
yn wheigooo, s. the fifth. Q  
queig-jeig, a. fifteen. 
yn wheig-jeig, a. the fifteen. Q 
queig-jeigoo or queigoo-yeig, a. fifteenth. 
yn whe[i]g-jeigoo or wheigoo-yeig, a. the 
fifteenth. Q  
queig as feed, a. twenty-five or more, lit. 
five and twenty. 
yn wheig as feedoo, a. the twenty-fifth. Q  
quiggal, s. f. the distaff, the lint or tow put on 
the distaff to spin; pl. -yn. 
yn whuiggal, s. the distaff; it is also applied 
to the lint on the distaff. Q 
nyn guiggal, s. your, &c. distaff; pl. -yn. Q  
quiggalagh, a. d. of or belonging to a 
distaff, or the lint or flax on the distaff. 
quing, s. f. a yoke, a swingletree.  
e whing, s. his yoke; his large swingletree. 
Q  
whing-jeear, s. m. the leading horse or 
bullock in a yoke or team, the beast that is 
foremost inside. 
quiver 
yn whiver, s. the quiver; Gen. xxvii. 3: Gow 
nish, er-y-fa shen, ta mee guee ort, dty 
wappinyn, dty whiver as dty vhow, as immee 
royd magh gys y vagher, as taare feïeys er my 
hon. Now therefore take, I pray thee, thy 
weapons, thy quiver and thy bow, and go out to 
the field, and take me some venison. Q 
quoi, pro. who, whom, which, whose. 
quoi ec ta fys, p. who knows. 
quoi-erbee, pro. whoever, whosoever, 
whomsoever. 
quoif, s. f. a woman’s cap, or headdress; pl. 
-yn, or quoivyn. 
nyn goif, s. your, &c. woman’s cap; pl. -yn. 
Q  
nyn guoif, s. your, &c. woman’s cap. Q 
quoiney. See coiney. [deest; is coinney = 
koinney intended?] 
274 
R 
 
R 
This letter is one of the immutables in the 
Manks language, and changeth not; neither do 
many words from other letters come under it, 
except a few from f where r is the second 
letter. 
raa, s. m. a saying; pl. -ghyn. 
raa-creeney, s. m. a wise saying, a proverb; 
pl. raaghyn-creeney. 
raa-dorraghey, s. m. dark saying, a riddle; 
Jud. xiv. 12: Ver-yms magh raa-dorraghey: 
my oddys shiu dy jarroo bun y choyrt dou er 
cheu-sthie jeh shiaght laa yn vannish, as 
feddyn magh eh, eisht ver-yms diu jeih 
brelleenyn as feed, as jeih caghlaaghyn as feed 
dy gharmadyn. I will now put forth a riddle unto 
you: if ye can certainly declare it me within the 
seven days of the feast, and find it out, then I 
will give you thirty sheets and thirty change of 
garments; and 15: As haink eh gy-kione er y 
chiaghtoo laa, dy dooyrt ad rish ben Samson, 
Jean dty heshey y chleayney, dy vod eh ginsh 
dooin yn raa-dorraghey, er-nonney nee mayd 
uss as thie dty ayrey y lostey lesh aile. And it 
came to pass on the seventh day, that they 
said unto Samson’s wife, Entice thy husband, 
that he may declare unto us the riddle, lest we 
burn thee and thy father’s house with fire. 
raa-keeayllagh, s. m. a maxim, an adage. 
rahoil or raa-oil, a. famous, successful; 
Ecclesiasticus, xx. 9: Ta drogh-ghooinney 
ayn ta raahoil ayns e ghrogh-yannoo; as ta 
cosney ayn ta chyndaa gys coayl. There is a 
sinner that hath good success in evil things; 
and there is a gain that turneth to loss. 
raa-oilagh, a. proverbial. 
 
abbyr, v. say, say on.  
abbyragh. See y[i]arragh.  
cha n’abbyr, v. not say; -agh; -ee; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms, 94. A  
 
jir or jirr*, v. say, sayest, sayeth, &c.; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84. G.  
yarr or yiarragh, v. (from jir) would or 
wouldst say; -agh; -ee; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. J  
cha n’yiar or n’yiarr*, v. not say; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94, G  
cha n’iarr, v. not say; -agh; -in; -ins.  
jirrit, 85. See grait, said.  
 
gra, v. say, saying, saith, sayest.  
gra-agh. See yiarragh.  
dy ghra, v. to say; cre t[’]ou dy ghra (what 
thou sayest); Luke, xxii. 60: As dooyrt 
Peddyr, Ghooinney, cha s’aym cre t’ou dy 
ghra. And Peter said, Man, I know not what 
thou sayest. G  
er ghra, v. said, hath, &c. said. G  
dooyrt, v. said, did say.  
raait, 85. said, spoken. 
grait, 85. said, spoken.  
raad, s. m. a road, way, vent; adv. where. 
raaidyn, s. pl. roads, ways; Job. xiii. 27: 
T’ou cur my chassyn neesht ayns ny stockyn, 
as sooill ghyere ayd er ooilley my raaidyn. 
Thou puttest my feet also in the stocks, and 
lookest narrowly unto all my paths. 
fo-raad, a. under way or weigh. 
goaill-raad, v. prevailing; 1 Chron. xxi. 4: 
Ny-yeih, ghow goan y ree raad noi Joab. 
Nevertheless the king’s word prevailed against 
Joab. 
raad, v. ride at anchor, to give way; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88. 
raadey, v. anchoring. 
raadee, a. d. of anchorage. 
raah, s. m. report, prosperity; Psl. lxxiii. 3: As 
cre’n-oyr? va mee seaghnit er coontey ny mee-
chrauee: ta mee myrgeddin fakin drogh ‘leih 
ayns lheid y raah. And why? I was grieved at 
the wicked: I do also see the ungodly in such 
prosperity. 
raalish, s. m. loose, empty talk; pl. -yn. 
raane, s. m. bail, surety, guarantee; pl. 
raanteeyn or raanteenyn; 2 Chron. xxv. 
24: As ghow eh ooilley’n airh as yn argid, as 
ooilley ny siyn v’er ny gheddyn ayns thie Yee fo 
currym Obed-edom, as tashtaghyn thie’n ree, 
as raanteenyn myrgeddin, as hyndaa eh 
reesht gys Samaria. And he took all the gold 
and the silver, and all the vessels that were 
found in the house of God with Obededom, and 
the treasures of the king’s house, the hostages 
275 
R 
 
also, and returned to Samaria. 
raanteenys, s. f. suretiship.  
raau* or raaue, v. warn, admonish; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. 
raauit, 85. warned, admonished. 
s’raauit, a. how warned. R 
raaue, s. m. a warning, a caution; pl. -yn  
fer-raauee, s. m. a monitor, a warner. 
fer raauee or raaueyder, s. m. a warner, an 
admonisher, a monitor; pl. of the former fir, 
of the latter -yn. 
radling, s. m. pales, railing; Ecclesiasticus, 
xxii. 18: Myr nagh vod radling troggit er yn 
yrjey shassoo noi niart ny geayee: myr shen 
cha vod cree agglagh, ayns smooinaghtyn 
ommydan, shassoo noi aggle erbee. Pales set 
on an high place will never stand against the 
wind: so a fearful heart in the imagination of a 
fool cannot stand against any fear. 
rag, s. m. a short storm; pl. -yn. 
raghidey, a. able to go or walk about. 
raghtal, a. rash, violent. 
s’raghtal, a. how rash or violent. R 
raghtalid, raghtalys, or raghlid, s. m. 
rashness, violence. 
raghtanys, s. f. rigour; pl. -yn. 
rah, s. m. a hago, funk, a strong smell; it is 
also used for a strong taste. 
rahagh, a. rammish; strong scented. 
rahgyl, s. f. the herb horseradish, poor man’s 
pepper. 
raiee, s. f. a quarter of a year. 
raigh, s. f. a rein; pl. -yn. This word was 
formerly applied to the reins or ropes from 
the horse gear to the harrow. 
jeh-raie, a. ungovernable, hard to deal 
with. 
raip, v. rend, tear, lacerate; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
raipey, v. rending, &c. 
raipit, 85. rent, torn, lacerated. 
s’raipit, a. how rent or torn. R 
neu-raipit, a. unrent, untorn. 
raipey, s. m. a rent or tear. 
raipee, a. d. of rending or tearing. 
raipeyder, s. m. a render, a tearer; pl. -yn. 
raip-roayrt, s. f. a spring tide that tears 
things away. 
rais* or raise, v. grope, move slowly; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88. 
raisey, v. groping, moving slowly. 
raisit, 85. groped, stirred. 
raisey, s. m. a grope, a move, as in the 
dark; pl. 67 [change -ey to -aghyn]. 
raiseyder, s. m. one who gropes. 
raistyl, s. m. a rake; pl. -yn. 
raistylagh, a. rakish, dissolute. 
rangan, s. m. a worn out animal; pl. -yn. 
rank, a. high or rapid in growth, luxuriant, 
rapid, hasty growth. Whether the Manks or 
the English can lay the best claim to this 
word I cannot decide, but I believe the 
Manks to be a much older language. 
s’rank, a. how luxuriant, comp. and sup., 
or s’rankey. R 
rankid or rankys, s. rankness, luxuriance, 
exuberance, hastiness, rapidity. 
rannee, s. m. a roguish fellow, a wag. 
rag-rannee, s. m. an arch rogue. 
rap, s. m. a counterfeit, a base coin; a little 
rogue. 
rass, s. m. seed; pl. -yn or -inyn. Phrase, rass 
as cass. [Seed and foot, i.e. root and seed, 
or root and branch.] 
my-rass, a. boiled, in seed. 
resh, a. d. of seed; as, arroo resh (seed 
corn); snaie resh (the vital thread).  
rass, v. rip, undo a sewing; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
rassey, v. ripping, undoing a sewing, 
undoing any work. 
rasst or rast, 85. ripped. 
s’rast, a. how ripped. 
rassey, s. m. a rip, a rent in the seam; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn]. 
rasseyder, s. m. a ripper, a render of work. 
rassag or reeassag, s. f. a creel. 
roddag, s. f. a very coarsely woven creel, 
or straw rope net work. 
roddagagh, s. m. moor gall; pl. -yn.  
rastagh, a. gusty, squally, rapidity of wind, 
windy, boisterous; Mat. xiv. 30: Agh 
276 
R 
 
gennaghtyn yn gheay rastagh, v’eh agglit: as 
aarloo dy gholl fo, dyllee eh, gra, Hiarn, saue 
mee. But when he saw the wind boisterous, he 
was afraid; and beginning to sink, he cried, 
saying, Lord, save me. 
s’rasstagh, a. how squally or gusty. R 
s’rasstee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. R 
rastid, s. m. gustiness, squalliness. 
ratçh, s. m. a run. It might have been the 
original Manks of race, but it is now only 
generally applied to a run or race before a 
jump; pl. -yn. 
ratçh, v. -agh, 77; &c. 
ratçhal, v. making runs. 
ratçhit, 85. run or pulled quickly. 
ratçheyder, s. m. a runner of short runs. 
raue, a. d. of the stroke of an oar, or rowing. 
maidjey raue, s. m. an oar; pl. 69 [i.e. 
maidjyn raue]. 
Raue, s. f. Rome. 
Raueagh, a. Romish. 
raun, s. f. a seal, a sea-calf; pl. -teeyn or -yn; 
Lam. iv. 3: Ta eer raunyn ny marrey tayrn 
magh nyn sheeintyn, t’ad cur keeagh da ny 
quallianyn oc. Even the sea monsters draw out 
the breast, they give suck to their young ones. 
roaun or roauyn. See raun. 
re, s. f. the moon, one of the names of the 
moon; the same word which the Rev. Wm. 
Shaw gives in his Gaelic dictionary for 
moon; although the translators of the Bible 
have written it ray, Isa. lx. 19, the same as 
a ray of light: Cha bee yn ghrian ny smoo dty 
hoilshey ’sy laa, chamoo son ray-sollys bee yn 
eayst ayd son soilshey dhyt. The sun shall be 
no more thy light by day; neither for brightness 
shall the moon give light unto thee.  
ray. See re.  
re-hollys vooar y n’ouyr, s. f. the great 
harvest moonlight, called so from the 
moon’s rising about or near the same time 
for a week successively, at the time of full, 
caused by the situation of the earth and 
moon at or after the autumnal equinox.  
re-hollys vooar ny gabbyl, s. f. the 
moonlight-that immediately follows the 
former.  
oie-rehollys, s. f. a moon light night. 
rea, a. even, level, plain, smooth. 
s’rea, a. how even or regular, comp. and 
sup. R 
neu-rea, uneven, not even. 
rea-id, s. m. smoothness, evenness.  
rea, s. m. a ram, a tup; pl. -ghyn. 
reagh, a. ruttish, wanton, merry, sportive, 
lecherous. 
s’reagh, a. how merry or wanton. R 
s’reaie, a. id., comp. and sup. Prov. “Tra 
sreaie yn chloie, share faagail jeh” [When 
the play is merriest, ’tis best to leave off] 
and “Myr smoo yn çheshaght, sreaie yn 
chloie” [The more the company the merrier 
the play.] 
reays, a. riggish, tupping, wanting the tap 
or ram.  
reaïd, s. m. wantonness, merriment, sport, 
mirth, lecherousness. 
readan, s. f. a windpipe; a sharp puff or blast 
of wind; pl. -yn. 
reagh or reaie, v. disentangle, decide, clear; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
reaghey, v. unravelling, clearing, 
disentangling, deciding.  
reait, 85. decided, disentangled, unravelled, 
cleared, settled. 
s’reat or s’reait, a. how decided or 
disentangled. R 
reaghey, s. m. decision, disentanglement; 
pl. 67 [change -ey to -aghyn]. 
reaghee, a. d. of disentanglement, 
clearance. 
reagheyder, s. m. a decider, &c.; pl. -yn.  
reaghys, s. f. decision; settlement.  
fer-reaghys, s. m. an umpire. 
reaish, s. f. a span; pl. -yn. This word, no 
doubt, ought to be the Manks of cubit. 
reajagh, a. orderly, correct, discreet. 
reajid or reajys, s. discretion, order. 
reap 
eean-reap, s. f. 47. corn-creak, rail. 
reayrt or reayrtys, s. m. view, extention of 
sight, reach of view. 
rheyrt or rheyrtys. See reayrt. 
rheyrtyssagh, a. within the reach of sight 
or view. 
277 
R 
 
recort, v. record, register; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
recortey, v. recording, registering.  
recortit, 85. recorded, registered. 
recortys, s. f. a record, a register; pl. -syn. 
recortys-killagh, s. f. church register.  
recortysser, s. m. a recorder, a registrar; pl. 
-yn; 1 Kings, iv. 3: Jehoshaphat mac Ahilud, 
yn recortysser. Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud, 
the recorder.  
red, s. m. a thing; pl. -dyn. Nhee is nearly 
syn. with this word, but there are words that 
nhee will not agree with; as, un red (one 
thing); un nhee, red elley, nhee elley, the 
nhee does not sound so agreeably with 
these. Prov. “Ta’n red ta goit dy mie ny 
share na’n red ta jeant dy mie.” [The thing 
that is taken well is better than the thing 
that is done well.] And “Cha nee eshyn ta 
red beg echey ta boght, agh eshyn ta 
geearree mooarane.” [It is not he who has 
little that is poor, but he who desires much.] 
red-hene, s. m. the thing itself. 
ree, s. m. king; pl. -aghyn or -ghyn.  
moylley rea or ree, praise to the King. 
reeoil, kingly, royal, regal. 
s’reeoil, a. how royal or kingly, comp. and 
sup. 
ardys, s. m. -reeoil, royal highness. 
lorg-reeoil, s. f. a sceptre. 
reeriaght, s. m. kingdom; pl. -yn. 
rein. See ben-rein. 
ben-rein, s. f. a queen, king’s wife. 
reeall, v. wriggle, cleanse corn; -agh, 77, -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
reealley, v. wriggling, cleansing corn in a 
sieve; Jer. iv. 11: Geay fowanagh veih sleityn 
ard yn aasagh noi inneen my phobble, cha nee 
son fasney, ny son reealley. A dry wind of the 
high places in the wilderness toward the 
daughter of my people, not to fan, nor to 
cleanse; and Amos, ix. 9: Son cur-my-ner, 
ver-ym sarey, as nee’m creearrey thie Israel 
mastey dy chooilley ashoon, myr ta arroo er ny 
reealley ayns creear, ny-yeih, cha bee yn grine 
sloo caillit er y thalloo. For, lo, I will command, 
and I will sift the house of Israel among all 
nations, like as corn is sifted in a sieve, yet 
shall not the least grain fall upon the earth.  
reeallit or reealt, 85. wriggled.  
s’reealt, a. how wriggled. R 
reealleyder, s. m. a wriggler; pl. -yn. 
reeayllagh, s. m. anything thinly scattered 
or spread; pl. -yn. 
reean, s. m. a rattle or tightness in the breast 
or chest, a difficulty in breathing. 
reeast or reeastane, s. m. a rough, uneven, 
uncultivated piece of ground; pl. -yn. 
ushag reaisht or reeast, s. f. the mountain 
plover. 
reeastagh, a. coarse, rude, uneven, rough; 
when applied to cloth having large and 
small threads; when applied to land having 
hillocks and hollows. 
s’reeastagh, a. how uneven, coarse, rough, 
&c. 
s’reeastee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. R 
reeastid, s. m. unevenness, coarseness, 
roughness. 
rastane, s. m. an uncultivated piece of land. 
rastanagh, a. uncultivated, unimproved by 
tillage. 
s’rastanagh, a. how uncultivated. R 
s’rastanee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. R 
rastanid, s. m. uncultivation.  
reejerey, s. m. regent prince, vice[r]e[g]ent, 
prince; Hos. iii. 4: Son bee cloan Israel ry-
foddey gyn ree, as gyn reejerey, as gyn oural, 
as gyn jalloo, as gyn ephod, as gyn teraphim. 
For the children of Israel shall abide many days 
without a king, and without a prince, and 
without a sacrifice, and without an image, and 
without an ephod, and without teraphim; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn].  
reen, a. tough, ropy, vi[s]cid, gluey.  
s’reen, a. how tough or ropy. R 
s’reeney, a. id., comp. and sup. R 
reeney, a. pl. tough, ropy, &c. 
reen or reenee, v. toughen, to get tough; 
-agh, 77; -ys, 88. 
dy reenaghey, v. to toughen, get tough. 
reenit, 85. toughened, &c. 
reeneyder, s. m. something that toughens. 
reenid, s. m. toughness, &c., hard to be 
chewed. 
278 
R 
 
reesht, adv. again; -agh, id. em. 
giennaghtyn reesht spyrrydoil, s. spiritual 
birth, regeneration. 
irree-reesht or irree-seose reesht, s. 
resurrection; Mat. xxii. 31: Agh mychione 
irree-reesht ny merriu, nagh vel shiu er lhaih 
shen va loayrit riu liorish Jee, gra…But as 
touching the resurrection of the dead, have ye 
not read that which was spoken unto you by 
God, saying…. Irree-seose; John, xi. 24: 
Dooyrt Martha rish, Ta fys aym dy n’irree eh 
reesht ec yn irree-seose ’sy laa jerrinagh. 
Martha saith unto him, I know that he shall rise 
again in the resurrection at the last day. 
reih, s. m. choice; pl. reighyn. 
reih, v. choose; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. Reih as 
teigh (pick and choice).  
reihit or reiht, 85. chosen. Cloan reiht (the 
elect). 
s’reiht, a. how chosen or elected. R 
reihder, s. m. a chooser; pl. -yn.  
reill, v. rule. reign, govern; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
reill or reilley, v. governing. 
reillt, 85. ruled, governed. 
s’reillt, a. how ruled. R 
reill, s. m. rule, reign; pl. -yn. 
reiltys, s. f. rule, government. 
ard-reill or ard-reiltys, s. m. principality, 
chief rule, monarchy; pl. -yn. 
fer-reill, s. m. a ruler, magistrate, or person 
in authority. 
fir-reill, s. pl. 
ir-reill, s. rulers; Isaiah, xlix. [7]: Myr shoh 
ta’n Chiarn, Saualtagh Israel dy ghra, as e Er-
casherick, rishyn ta sleih soiaghey beg jeh, 
rishyn ta dwoaie yn ashoon, rish sharvaant dy 
ir-reill… Thus saith the Lord, the Redeemer of 
Israel, and his Holy One, to him whom man 
despiseth, to him whom the nation abhorreth, to 
a servant of rulers. F 
lorg-reill, s. f. a sceptre. 
reiltagh, s. m. a ruler, a magistrate; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. 
ard-reiltagh, s. m. a monarch; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. 
meereiltagh, a. unruly, turbulent, disloyal; 
s. m. an unruly person; pl. 71 [change -agh 
to -ee]. 
reir or rere, according to, to the utmost of, as 
far, as far as possible. 
reirey, v. reaching, extending. 
reis, s. m. race; pl. -yn. Gael. 
reisht 
croan[-]reisht, s. f. amradulsa, a species of 
night shade, the decoction of which is said 
to be good for the healings of inward 
bruises. 
remlad, s. m. a remnant, a narrow stripe of 
cloth, &c.; pl. -yn. 
renaig, s. f. a hair, one hair; pl. -yn. 
renaigagh, a. hairy, having hairs.  
resoon, s. m. reason, rationality; pl. -yn.  
resoon, v. reason; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
resooney, v. reasoning, arguing. 
resoonit, 85. reasoned. 
resoonagh, a. reasonable, rational. 
s’resoonagh, a. how reasonable. R 
s’resoonee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. R 
neu-resoonagh, a. unreasonable. 
resooneyder, s. m. a reasoner, an arguer. 
resowir or resowr, s. m. a receiver; pl. -yn. 
reuyr or rouyr, v. dig, delve, root; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. 
reuyrey, v. digging, delving, rooting. 
reuyrit, 85. dug, delved, rooted. 
s’reuyrit, a. how dug or delved. R 
reuyreyder, s. m. a digger; pl. -yn. 
rourey, s. f. a headland, a piece of land in 
the end of a field, called so, no doubt, 
because in old times, generally dug.  
rey, done, done with, a total failure; Rev. 
xviii. 14: As ta ny messyn va yeearree dty 
chree orroo, er n’immeeaght voïd, as dy 
chooilley nhee va millish as mie, er 
n’immeeaght voïd as t’ou rey roo son dy bragh. 
And the fruits that thy soul lusted after are 
departed from thee, and all things which were 
dainty and goodly are departed from thee, and 
thou shalt find them no more at all; Hymn, 76 
[rey is not in Hymn 76; maybe 26: Ta 
ooilley yn caggey rey rish]. 
279 
R 
 
reyggyryn, s. pl. a few, some few; Zec. xi. 
11: As ve brisht er y laa shen: myr shen hoig 
reyggyryn treih yn chioltane, ren farkiaght 
orrym, dy nee goo yn Chiarn ve. And it was 
broken in that day: and so the poor of the flock 
that waited upon me knew that it was the word 
of the Lord. 
regiryn. See reyggyryn. 
rheam or ream, s. m. realm; pl. -yn. 
rheamys, s. room, space, extent. 
rheamyssagh, a. roomy, spacious, 
extensive, capacious. 
s’reamyssagh, a. how roomy. R 
s’reamyssee, a. more or most roomy. R 
rheamyssid, s. m. roominess, spaciousness. 
rhennagh, s. f. fern; pl. 72 [change -agh to 
-eeyn]. 
rhennee, a. d. of fern. 
kiark rhennee, s. f. a partridge. 
rhesar, s. f. razor; pl. -yn. 
rheynn, v. divide, distribute; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
reynn. See rheynn; Exod. xv. 9: Dooyrt y 
noid, Hem er nyn eiyrt’s, berr-ym orroo, reynn-
ym y spooilley: bee cooilleeney m’aigney aym 
orroo; my chliwe nee’m y hayrn, nee my laue 
ad y stroie. The enemy said, I will pursue, I will 
overtake, I will divide the spoil; my lust shall be 
satisfied upon them; I will draw my sword, my 
hand shall destroy them; and Acts, xiii. 19: As 
tra v’eh er stroie shiaght ashoonyn ayns cheer 
Chanaan, reynn eh yn thalloo oc orroo liorish 
cron. And when he had destroyed seven 
nations in the land of Chanaan, he divided their 
land to them by lot. 
rheynnit, 85. divided, distributed. 
s’rheynnit, a. how divided. R 
neu-rheynnit, a. undivided, undistributed. 
rheynn, s. m. a division, a distribution; pl. 
-yn.  
mooar-rheynn, s. m. a province. 
rheynneyder, s. m. a divider; pl. -yn. 
ronney, s. m. a portion, share, division; pl. 
67 [change -ey to -aghyn].  
cooid-ronney, s. m. portion of goods 
divided. 
e chooid-ronney, s. his dividend. C  
stoyr-ronney, s. m. a dividend; but it is 
generally understood to be a remainder 
after division not worth dividing. 
rhollan, s. f. a whirler, spool, a nave; pl. -yn; 
sheeves; 1 Kings, vii. 33: As va obbyr ny 
queeylyn casley rish obbyr queeyl fainagh; va 
ny essylyn oc, as ny rhollanyn oc, as ny 
croughyn oc, as ny spakyn oc ooilley roit. And 
the work of the wheels was like the work of a 
chariot wheel: their axletrees, and their naves, 
and their felloes, and their spokes, were all 
molten. 
rhollanagh, a. having spools, &c. 
rhum, s. m. room, apartment; pl. -yn. 
rhum-aarlee, s. m. a kitchen. 
Rhumsaa, s. f. Ramsey, a town in the parish 
of Maughold. 
rhusag, s. f. an amulet; pl. -yn. 
ribbag, s. f. a piece, part, or parcel rent or 
torn off from something. 
rubbag. See ribbag. 
ribbeh or ribbey, s. f. a snare, trap, or gin, 
something to entrap unwarily; pl. <76> [67. 
change -ey to -aghyn]. 
ribbeyder, s. m. an ensnarer, a fowler; Pro. 
vi. 5: Jean oo hene y livrey, myr y feeaïh veih 
laue y chelgeyr, as myr ushag ass laue y 
ribbeyder. Deliver thyself as a roe from the 
hand of the hunter, and as a bird from the hand 
of the fowler; pl. -yn. See also eeanleyder.  
ribl or ribil, v. ripple; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys 88.  
ribley, v. rippling. 
riblit, 85. rippled.  
ribleyder, s. m. a rippler; pl. -yn. 
riblas, s. m. a lath under the scraw of a 
thatched house; pl. -syn. See also thooane. 
rick 
oast-rick, s. m. a public or ale-house sign. 
rick, s. m. a satisfactory answer; a resolve[;] 
uniformity of rule, a steady determined 
manner, settled rule; pl. -yn.  
rieau, <s. m.> [adv.] ever, the ever that is 
past; rieau er dy henney (ever since); er dy 
rieau (from everlasting); cha row rieau 
(never was).  
er-dy-rieau, adv. from eternity, for the ever 
280 
R 
 
which is past, all the time that hath been. 
See rieau. 
rieugh, a. real, not imaginary.  
con[-]rieugh, a. imaginary, not real. 
riftan, s. m. a refused person, a worthless 
fellow; pl. -yn. 
riggan, v. rut; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -ys, 88. 
rigganey, v. rutting. 
riggyl, s. m. a ram half castrated; pl. -yn. 
rimlagh, s. f. a fishing line; pl. 72 [change 
-agh to -eeyn]. 
rimlee, a. d. of a fishing line. 
rimmeig, s. f. a weal, a stripe, a streak, a 
mark made in the skin by the blow of a 
whip or rod, &c.;&c.; pl. -yn. 
rimmeig, v. to make weals, &c.; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
rimmeigit, 85. streaked, striped, 
variegated. 
s’rimmeigit, a. how striped. R 
rimmeigagh, a. having weals, stripes, or 
streaks. 
s’rimmeigagh, a. how full of stripes, or 
weals. R 
s’rimmeigee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. R 
rimmeigeyder, s. m. one who makes weals, 
streaks, &c. 
rimmey, s. m. a rim, a ledge; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn]; 1 Kings, vii. 36: Son er 
plaityn ny rimmaghyn, as er ny boarderyn ren 
eh grainnaghey cherubim, lionyn, as biljyn-
palm, cordail rish cummey dagh unnane oc; as 
reddyn elley ooilley mygeayrt. For on the plates 
of the ledges thereof, and on the borders 
thereof, he graved cherubims, lions, and palm 
trees, according to the proportion of every one, 
and additions round about. 
ring, s. f. a verse, a subdivision; Gael. 
rinkyn or roankyn, s. pl. things separated or 
scattered from the main body. 
rio, s. m. frost, ice; pl. -ghyn. 
rioee, a. d. of frost or ice.  
lheeah-rio, s. f. hoar-frost. 
rio, v. freeze, coagulate; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-ys, 88.  
riojit, 85. frozen, coagulated.  
s’riojit, a. how frozen. R 
rioeeagh, a. frosty, icy.  
rioder, s. m. a freezer; pl. -yn.  
rish, adv. p. with, by, unto him, with him; 
-yn, id. em. 
rish-hene, p. p. to himself, with himself.  
r’ee, adv. p. to her, unto her; -ish, id. em. 
roo, p. p. to them, with them, unto them; 
-syn, id. em. 
roo-hene, p. p. to themselves. 
rhym, p. p. to me, unto me; -s, id. em. 
rooin, p. p. to us, used in, doing to us; -yn, 
to us, em. 
rhyt, p. p. to thee, unto thee; -s, id. em. 
riu, p. p. to you, unto you or ye; dy ghoaill 
riu (to receive you); Luke, ix. 5: As quoi-
erbee nagh jean goaill riu, tra aagys shiu yn 
ard-valley shen, crie-jee yn eer joan jeh ny 
cassyn eu, son feanish nyn ‘oi. And whosoever 
will not receive you, when ye go out of that city, 
shake off the very dust from your feet for a 
testimony against them; -ish, id. em. 
cur-rish, v. doing, practise; Micah, ii. 1: 
Smerg dauesyn ta shêgin er mee-chairys, as 
smooinaghtyn er yn olk er nyn lhiabbaghyn! 
cha leah’s ta’n moghrey soilshaghey t’ad cur 
rish, er-yn-oyr dy vel eh ayns pooar nyn laue. 
Woe to them that devise iniquity, and work evil 
upon their beds! when the morning is light, they 
practise it, because it is in the power of their 
hand. 
cur-roo, p. having to do to or with [them]; 
-syn id. em.  
cur-rhym, v. doing with me, having to do 
with me: -s, id. em. 
goaill-rish, v. acknowledging, admitting; 
dy ghoaill-rish (to acknowledge or admit). 
riyr, adv. last night, yester-night. 
arroo[-]y[-]riyr, s. f. the night before last. 
This word may be a corruption of earroo, 
number, the night that numbered before last 
night. 
roa, s. m. a row; pl. -ghyn. 
roa, v. to set in row; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
roaghey, v. making in rows.  
roait, 85. rowed. 
roagan, s. f. a scollop; pl. -yn.  
281 
R 
 
roauyr, a. fat, thick. 
roauyrey, a. pl. fat, thick. 
s’roauyr, a. how fat or thick. K 
s’riurey, a. fatter, fattest the comp. and 
sup. of roauyr. R 
kione roauyr, s. the best part, the thick end 
or head. 
roauyragh, s. m. f. a fat one. This word is 
seldom used, but I find the plural in Zec. xi. 
16: …trog-yms seose bochilley ayns y cheer, 
nagh jean jeeaghyn lurg ny [kirree] cailjey, 
chamoo shirrey son yn eayn, ny lheihys adsyn 
ta doghanit, ny gymmyrkey lesh shen ta er-
troggloo: agh ee-ys eh feill ny roauyree, as 
raipee eh ny yngnyn oc ayns peeshyn. …I will 
raise up a shepherd in the land, which shall not 
visit those that be cut off, neither shall seek the 
young one, nor heal that that is broken, nor 
feed that that standeth still: but he shall eat the 
flesh of the fat, and tear their claws in pieces. 
riurid, s. f. fatness, fat. It is contracted to 
riuid, and also used for thickness or 
largeness in circumference; pl. -yn. 
reuïd or reurid, s. m. fatness, fat; Psalm, 
xvii. 10: T’ad dooint ayns y reuïd oc hene: as 
ta’n beeal oc loayrt reddyn mooaralagh. They 
are inclosed in their own fat: and their mouth 
speaketh proud things. 
roayrt or roart, s. f. the spring tide, a great 
flow of any thing; pl. -yn; vel y roayrt ec y 
vullagh (is the spring at the height) ? Prov. 
“Lurg roayrt hig contraie.” [After spring 
tide comes neap tide.] 
bioghey-roayrt, s. m. the first rising of the 
spring tide after a neap. 
raip-roayrt, s. f. a spring tide that tears 
things away. 
robbee, s. f. a ruffle pl. -yn. 
rock, v. cockle, pucker; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
rockey, v. cockling, puckering. 
rockit, 85. cockled, puckered. 
rockey, s. m. a pucker, &c.;&c.; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn]. 
rockeyder, s. m. one who cockles, &c. 
roddan, s. f. a rat; pl. -yn. 
roibage or robaig, s. f. a wisker; pl. -yn.  
roie, v. run, running, ran; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
roight, 85. run through. 
roït, 85. run, cast, melted, molten; 1 Kings, 
vii. 33: As va obbyr ny queeylyn casley rish 
obbyr queeyl fainagh; va ny essylyn oc, as ny 
rhollanyn oc, as ny croughyn oc, as ny spakyn 
oc ooilley roit. And the work of the wheels was 
like the work of a chariot wheel: their axletrees, 
and their naves, and their felloes, and their 
spokes, were all molten. 
s’roit, a. how run, cast, melted, or molten. 
R 
roie-folley, s. the bloody flux. 
fer-roie, s. m. a deserter, a runner. 
roieder, s. m. a runner; pl. -yn. 
roig, s. f. the King’s evil. 
roih, s. f. an arm; pl. -aghyn. 
roish, adv. before, anterior, before him; -yn, 
id. em.  
roish-hene, p. p. before himself. 
ro’ee, p. p. before her; -ish, id. em. 
rhymbee, adv. p. before her; hie ee 
rhymbee (she went away, on the way before 
her); -ish, id. em. 
roïe[-]hene, p. p. before herself. 
roue, p. p. before them; -syn, id. em. 
rhymboo, adv. p. before them; hie ad 
rhymboo (they went away or on before 
them); -syn, id. em 
roue-hene, p. p. before themselves.  
roym, p. p. before me; -s, id. em. 
roym[-]pene, p. p. before myself. 
roïn, p. before us; -yn, id. em. 
roin[-]hene, p. p. before us, before 
ourselves. 
royd, p. p. before thee; -s, id. em. 
royd-hene, p. p. before thyself. 
royd oo, p. p. away thou, begone thou. 
reue, adv. p. before you or ye, or go ye, 
begone; -ish, id. em.  
reue[-]hene, adv. p. before yourselves.  
rhymbiu, adv. p. before you or ye; -ish, id. 
em. 
roish y thooilley, a. antideluvian. 
roïe, adv. before now; [1] Sam. xvii. 30: As 
hyndaa eh veihsyn, dy loayrt ny goan cheddin 
rish fer elley: as dreggyr y pobble eh myr dooyrt 
ad roïe. And he turned from him toward 
282 
R 
 
another, and spake after the same manner: and 
the people answered him again after the former 
manner. 
rolaue, adv. before, beforehand. 
rolaueid or rolaueys, s. m. anticipation, the 
act of being before hand. 
rollag, s. f. the hollow an oar works in on the 
gunwale of a boat; pl. -yn. 
rollage, s. f. a star; pl. -yn. 
rollageagh, a. starry; Cant. vi. 4: T’ou uss 
aalin, O my ghraih myr Tirzah, stoamey myr 
Jerusalem, gloyroil myr slane sollyssid 
rollageagh yn aer. Thou art beautiful, O my 
love, as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, terrible 
as an army with banners. [NB Manx and 
English texts do not correspond here.] 
s’rollageagh, a. how starry. R 
s’rollagee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. R 
rolla<e>g[e]ydagh, s. m. an astrologer, an 
astronomer; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]. 
rolla<e>g[e]ydys, s. f. astrology, 
astronomy. 
rolley, s. f. a roll; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
rowley, s. m. (sic) a roll; pl. 67 [change -ey 
to -aghyn]. 
roll or rowl, v. roll; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
rowl, v. roll; Mat. xxvii. 60: As doanluck eh 
eh ayns yn oaie noa echey hene, v’eh er chleiy 
ass y chreg: as rowl eh clagh vooar er beeal yn 
oaie, as jimmee eh roish. And laid it in his own 
new tomb, which he had hewn out in the rock: 
and he rolled a great stone to the door of the 
sepulchre, and departed; Mark, xv. 46: As 
chionnee eh aanrit-keyl as ghow eh neose eh, 
as hoill eh eh ayns yn aanrit, ass doanluck eh 
eh ayns oaie va cleight ayns creg, as rowll eh 
clagh er beeal yn oaie. And he bought fine 
linen, and took him down, and wrapped him in 
the linen, and laid him in a sepulchre which was 
hewn out of a rock, and rolled a stone unto the 
door of the sepulchre; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
rowlal, v. rolling, rolleth.  
rowlit, 85. rolled; Mark, xvi. 4: As tra v’ad 
er yeeaghyn, honnick ad y chlagh rowlit 
ersooyl: son v’ee feer vooar. And when they 
looked, they saw that the stone was rolled 
away: for it was very great. 
rollit, 85. rolled. 
rowleyder, s. m. a roller; pl. -yn.  
rolleyder, s. m. a roller; pl. -yn. 
Romanagh, s. m. a Roman; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee]. 
ronneeaght or ronniaght, s. m. reverie or 
revery, ribaldry, a foolish song, ranting 
talk, raving in drink, &c.;&c.; Job, xxx. 9: 
As nish cha vel mee agh son ronniaght daue, 
dy jarroo, ta mee son an-ghoo oc. And now am 
I their song, yea, I am their byword; pl. -yn. 
rons* or ronsee, v. search, ransack, rummage. 
-agh, 77; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
ronsagh or ronsaghey, v. searching, 
ransacking, rummaging.  
ronsit, 85. ransacked, searched. 
s’ronsit, a. how ransacked or searched. R 
ronsey, s. m. a search, a ransack; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn]. 
ronseyder, s. m. a searcher, &c.; pl. -yn. 
ronsoilagh 
neu-ronsoilagh, a. unsearchable, 
inscrutable, inexplorable. 
roo, s. m. a ruff; pl. -ghyn. 
rooit, s. f. a peal; as, rooit harnee, (a peal of 
thunder); pl. -yn. 
roon, s. f. rancour, resentment, malice, spite. 
roonagh, a. rancorous<ness>, spiteful, 
perverse; Mat. xvii. 17: O heeloghe vee-
chredjuagh as roonagh, caid ta mish dy ve 
meriu? O faithless and perverse generation, 
how long shall I be with you?; revengeful, 
malignant, vindictive. 
s’roonagh, a. how rancorous or spiteful. R  
s’roonee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. R 
roonid, s. m. rancorousness, &c.  
roost, s. m. rind, bark, peel. 
roost, v. strip, make bare, peel off, unbark; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
rooisht, v. strip<ped> naked, bare<d> of 
covering; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
roostey, v. making naked. 
rooishtit, 85. stript or stripped, made naked 
or bare of clothing. 
283 
R 
 
s’rooishtit, a. how stripped or bared. R 
roosteen, s. m. a naked person; pl. -ee [pl. 
of roosteenagh]; Isa. lviii. 7: Nagh nee dy 
rheynn dty arran er ny accryssee, as dy der oo 
lhiat ny ymmyrchee ta gyn fastee gys dty hie? 
tra hee oo yn roosteen, dy der oo eaddagh da; 
as nagh jean oo oo hene y cheiltyn veih dty eill 
hene? Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, 
and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to 
thy house? when thou seest the naked, that 
thou cover him; and that thou hide not thyself 
from thine own flesh? 
roosteenagh, a. naked, in want of clothes. 
rooisht, s. m. the naked; Job xxiv. 7: Cha 
vel ad cur aaght ny eaddagh da’n rooisht, myr 
shen nagh vel coodagh oc veih’n feayraght. 
They cause the naked to lodge without clothing, 
that they have no covering in the cold. 
rooisht, a. 
s’rooisht, a. how naked or bare. R 
rooishtey, a. pl. naked, uncovered. 
cass-rooisht, a. bare-foot, bare-footed. 
coshee-rooisht, s. pl. barefeet or barefooted 
travellers. 
jiarg[-]rooisht, [a.] stark naked. 
rooishteyder, s. m. a person or thing that 
strips or makes naked. 
rooishtid, s. m. nakedness, nudity. 
roostey, v. robbing. 
roostit, 85. robbed, rifled; Zec. xiv. 2: Son 
chaglee-ym ooilley ny ashoonee noi Jerusalem 
dy chaggey, as bee’n ard-valley er ny ghoaill, 
as bee ny thieyn er ny roostey… For I will 
gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle; 
and the city shall be taken, and the houses 
rifled…,. [NB er ny roostey, not roostit, 
here.] 
roosteyr, s. m. a robber; pl. -yn. 
roosteyrys (sic: stress), s. f. robbery; Psl. 
lxii. 10: O ny treisht-jee ayns aggair as 
roosteyrys… O trust not in wrong and 
robbery…. 
rosh, v. reach, stretch; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
raink, v. did arrive or arrived. 
roshtyn, v. reaching. 
er roshtyn, v. hath, &c. reached, arrived. 
er-roshtyn, v. hath, &c. reached or arrived. 
roshit, 85. reached, extended. 
s’roshit, a. how reached. R 
rosheyder, s. m. one who reaches; pl. -yn. 
rouail, v. roving, roaming, rambling, 
wandering; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
rouaillagh, a. unsettled, of a roaming, 
rambling, unsteady [of] mind, devious. 
rouailtagh, s. m. a rover, rambler, &c.;&c.; 
pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]. 
s’rouailagh or s’rouailtagh, a. how 
roving, roaming, or disposed to wander. R 
s’rouailee or s’rouailtee, a. id., [comp. and 
sup.,] 58. R 
rouailtys-aigney, s. m. the roving or 
wandering of the mind. 
rouan, s. m. riot, uproar. 
rouan, v. idem; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
rouanagh, a. riotous; s. m. a rioter; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. 
s’rouanagh, a. how riotous. R 
s’rouanee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. R 
rouanid or rouanys, s. f. riotousness, 
rioting. 
rour or rouyr, too much; Exod. xviii. 18: Nee 
oo son shickyrys, goll naardey chammah oo 
hene as y pobble ta mayrt: son ta’n errey shoh 
ro hrome er dty hon; te rour dhyt’s dty 
lomarcan dy ymmyrkey. Thou wilt surely wear 
away, both thou, and this people that is with 
thee: for this thing is too heavy for thee; thou 
art not able to perform it thyself alone; too 
many, over and above what should be. 
ro, adv. too; from rouyr or rour, too much; 
ro[-]c[h]reoi (too hard). There is another ro 
(before) as, rolaue (before hand), this latter 
is from roish [(q.v.)].  
roud, adv. too far, too late. 
rouyl, s. m. rage, fury; a. rabid, furious, 
frantic. See er-roul. 
er roul or er-rouyl, a. in a rage, 
outrageous, violent, disorderly.  
rub or rubb*, v. wipe, rub; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
rubbit, 85. wiped, rubbed.  
s’rubbit, a. how rubbed. R 
clooid-rubbee, s. m. a. towel. 
284 
R 
 
rubbeyder, s. m. a rubber, a wiper. 
clagh-rubban, s. a rubbing stone. 
ruck, s. f. a rick of turf or hay; pl. -yn. 
ruck, v. rick; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
ruckit, 85. ricked. 
s’ruckit, a. how ricked. R 
ruckeyder, s. m. one who makes ricks. 
rugg or ruggyr, v. did bare, was or wast born, 
did come by birth; -agh, 77; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88; [Acts, xxii. 
3: Ta mish dy firrinagh my ghooinney ta my 
Hew, ruggyr ayns Tarsus, ard-valley ayns 
Cilicia, agh va mee troggit ayns yn ard-valley 
shoh, ec cassyn Ghamaliel, as ynsit lurg aght 
s’ynrick leigh nyn shenn-ayryn, ayns graih 
jeean gys Jee, myr t’euish ooilley jiu. I am verily 
a man which am a Jew, born in Tarsus, a city in 
Cilicia, yet brought up in this city at the feet of 
Gamaliel, and taught according to the perfect 
manner of the law of the fathers, and was 
zealous toward God, as ye all are this day.] 
ruggyr, s. m. birth, the time of birth; as, yn 
laa ruggyr mee (the day of my birth); 
ruggyr ee lhianno[o] mac (she brought 
forth a male child); born; <Acts, xxii. 3> 
[See above.]  
er ruggaghtyn, v. hath, &c. borne. 
er ny ruggey, v. hath, &c. been born. 
ruggit, 85. born, brought forth.  
neu-ruggit, a. unborn. 
ruggagh, a. rugged, rough, uneven, harsh. 
s’ruggagh, a. how rugged or uneven. R 
s’ruggee, a. id., 58. R 
ruillick or rhullick, s. f. a grave yard, a place 
set apart to bury the dead in, a churchyard.  
ruillickey, a. d. of a grave or church-yard. 
rumbyl, s. the edge or skirt of a garment; 
Nah. iii. 5: Cur-my-ner ta mish dt’oï, ta Chiarn 
ny flaunyssee dy ghra, as bee dty rumbyllyn 
troggit er dty eddin, as jeeagh-yms da ny 
ashoonyn dty nearey, as da ny reeriaghtyn dty 
scammylt. Behold, I am against thee, saith the 
Lord of hosts; and I will discover thy skirts upon 
thy face, and I will shew the nations thy 
nakedness, and the kingdoms thy shame. 
rhumbyl, s. m. the edge or skirt of a loose 
garment; Num. xv. 38: Loayr rish cloan Israel, 
as oardee, dy der ad fringeyn er rhumbyllyn 
nyn gharmadyn, trooid ny sheelogheyn oc, as 
dy der ad er fringe ny rhumbyllyn rybban 
gorrym. Speak unto the children of Israel, and 
bid them that they make them fringes in the 
borders of their garments throughout their 
generations, and that they put upon the fringe 
of the borders a ribband of blue. 
runt, a. round, circular, globular. 
s’runt, a. how round. R 
s’runtey, a. id., comp. and sup. R 
runtey, a. pl. round, circular.  
runt, v. to make round, &c.;&c.; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
runtaghey, v. rounding.  
runtit, 85. rounded.  
runtagh, a. roundish, oval.  
runtag, s. f. a round lump of a thing. 
runtid, s. m. roundness.  
ruy, a. reddish, brown.  
s’ruy, a. how reddish or brown. R 
s’ruyey, a. id., comp. and sup. R 
ruyey, a. pl. brown, reddish.  
argid-ruy, s. m. copper money, pence. 
fyn-ruy, a. having brown hair or fur. 
ruyghey, v. getting brown, reddening.  
ruyid, s. m., brownness, reddishness. 
ruagh, a. inclined to red, brown. 
raugh (sic), a. a light red colour. 
ruissagh, a. ruddy, reddish, of a fresh 
blooming colour. 
s’ruishagh, a. how ruddy. R 
s’ruishee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. R 
ry, (sounded re), to be, to, by, and sometimes 
a. This particle or adjunct is used before 
words as the following. 
ry-akin, v. to be seen. Cha jinnagh 
dooinney ta coyrt dy ve ry-akin dy bragh 
jeirk sy dorraghys. [A man who gives in 
order to be seen would never do alms in the 
dark.] 
ry-cheilley, adv. together, stuck together. 
ry-chlashtyn, v. to be beard. 
ry-chleayshyn, adv. by the ears. 
ry-chosh, adv. by the feet, by foot. 
ry-ennaghtyn, v. to be felt, or being felt. 
ry-foddey, adv. by a long time. 
ry-gheddyn, v. to be had or found. 
285 
R 
 
ry-heet, v. to come, being to come. 
ry-heshaght, v. to be in company, 
accompanying. 
ry-hoï or ry-oï, adv. reserved against, for 
and against. 
roï, adv. reserved for, provided for or 
against. 
ry-hrostey, v. to be fasting. 
ry-lheayst, adv. by the thigh, on the thigh; 
Cant. iii. 8: T’ad ooilley glackey nyn gliwenyn, 
aghtal ayns caggey, dagh dooinney as e chliwe 
ry-lheayst, son arrey ny hoie. They all hold 
swords, being expert in war: every man hath 
his sword upon his thigh because of fear in the 
night. 
ry-lhiattee, adv. by the side, aside. 
rybban, s. m. a riband; pl. -yn; Num. xv. 38: 
Loayr rish cloan Israel, as oardee, dy der ad 
fringeyn er rhumbyllyn nyn gharmadyn, trooid 
ny sheelogheyn oc, as dy der ad er fringe ny 
rhumbyllyn rybban gorrym. Speak unto the 
children of Israel, and bid them that they make 
them fringes in the borders of their garments 
throughout their generations, and that they put 
upon the fringe of the borders a ribband of blue. 
rubban. See rybban. 
rydlan, s. f. a cribble, a riddle; pl. -yn. 
ryptar, s. f. rupture; pl. -yn.  
lus y ryptar, s. f. allseed, rupture wort, 
little flax. 
286 
S 
 
S 
This letter, for its sound and changes, see 
Remark 28, &c. The feature of all the 
adjectives and the participles past of the 
language (which only I have marked 
participles) when initialled by this letter [viz. 
s’], is a feature that is not, perhaps, in any 
other language, but peculiar to the Manks 
alone; when such adjective ends in -agh, that 
-agh generally changes to -ee in the 
comparative and superlative degrees. See 58.  
saagh, s. m. a vessel; pl. siyn. 
siyn, s. pl. vessels; the pl. of saagh. 
yn taagh, s. the vessel. S 
e haagh, s. his vessel. S 
e hiyn, s. his vessels. S 
siyn-iu, s. pl. drinking vessels. 
saase, s. m. a mean, method or measure; pl. 
-yn. 
e haase, s. his mean or method. S 
saase-lheihys, s. m. medicine; Jer. xlvi. 11: 
Immee seose gys Gilead, as gow yn chielliu 
costal, O voidyn, inneen Egypt: ayns fardail nee 
oo goaill ymmodee saaseyn-lheihys; son cha 
bee oo er dty laanaghey. Go up into Gilead, 
and take balm, O virgin, the daughter of Egypt: 
in vain shalt thou use many medicines; for thou 
shalt not be cured. 
saaseagh, a. by means, measures or 
methods. 
Saasilagh, s. m. a Methodist; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. 
saaue, a/n. 
my haaue, s. my safety; Acts, vii. 49: Niau 
my stoyl-reeoil, as y thalloo stoyl my choshey: 
cren thie hroggys shiu dooys? ta’n Chiarn gra: 
ny cre vel ynnyd my haaue? Heaven is my 
throne, and earth is my footstool: what house 
will ye build me? saith the Lord: or what is the 
place of my rest? S 
saue or sau, v. save; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
hau* or haue, v. did save or saved; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. S 
sauail, v. saving, saveth, &c. 
dy hauail, v. to save. S  
sauit, 85. saved. 
saueyder, s. m. a saver; pl. -yn. 
sauallagh, s. m. a salvor; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee]. 
saualtagh, s. m. a saviour; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee]. 
yn taualtagh, s. the Saviour. S  
dty haualtagh, s. thy Saviour. S  
saualtys, s. f. salvation, redemption. 
yn taualtys, s. the salvation. S  
dty haualtys, s. thy salvation. S  
sauçhey, a. safe, not dangerous.  
dy sauçhey, adv. safely. 
saueçhys 
e haueçhys, s. his safety. S 
saaue, s. m. a saw; pl. -nyn. 
saaue, v. saw; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
e haaue, s. his saw; pl. -yn. S 
saaueal, v. sawing. 
saauit, 85. sawn or sawed. 
saaueyder, s. m. a sawer or sawyer; pl. -yn. 
saayll, s. m. sale; pl. -yn. 
sack, s. m. sack. This word is nearly the same 
in all languages, and is thought to be an 
antediluvian word; pl. seick.  
yn tack, s. the sack. S 
e hack, s. his sack. S 
saick, a. d. of a sack or sacks. 
e haick or heick, s. his sacks. S 
saggyrt, s. m. a minister, a priest or 
clergyman; pl. -yn. 
yn taggyrt, s. the priest or parson. S  
e haggyrt, s. his parson or priest. S  
nyn daggyrt, s. your, &c. parson, priest, or 
minister. S 
ard-saggyrt, s. m. high priest; pl. -yn. 
bwoid-saggart, s. m. the herb orchis 
satircon. 
corkey-taghyrt, s. m. long bearded oats. 
(sic, l. taggyrt?) 
saggyrtagh, a. d. of a priest or parson. 
saggyrtys, s. f. priesthood, &c. 
yn taggyrtys, s. the priesthood. S 
e haggyrtys, s. his ministry or priesthood. 
S 
nyn daggyrtys, s. your, &c. ministry or 
priesthood. S 
sahll or saill, s. m. saim, the white flesh of 
pork, &c.; the blubber of fish, &c.; grease; 
287 
S 
 
Psl. cxix. 70: Ta’n cree oc cha roauyr as saill: 
agh ta my haitnys er ve ayns dty leigh. Their 
heart is as fat as brawn: but my delight hath 
been in thy law. Prov. “Slaa sahll er toyn 
muck roauyr.” [Smearing grease on a fat 
pig’s breech.] 
e hahll, s. his saim or fat, blubber on fish. S 
sahllagh, a. having salm, &c. 
saie, adv. what satisfies, enough. 
e haie, s. his satiety, his enough. S 
saieid, s. m. satiety. See sonnys. 
sail, s. m. seal. 
sail, v. seal, secure; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
88; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
sailit, 85. sealed. 
saill, v. salt; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 88; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
haill, v. did salt; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; 
-ys, 94. S  
sailley or salley, v. salting. 
dy hailley, v. to salt. S  
saillt, 85. salted. 
ro hailt, a. too salted. S  
sa[i]lleyder, s. m. a salter; pl. -yn. 
e hailleyder, s. his salter. S  
saailley, s. f. brine, sea-water, salt-water; 
Ez. xlvii. 11: Agh ny ynnydyn laaghey t’ayn, 
as ny claddeeyn, cha bee ad er nyn lheihys, 
bee ad shen fo saailey gennish. But the miry 
places thereof and the marshes thereof shall 
not be healed; they shall be given to salt. 
dy haailey, s. of brine or salt water. S  
sailleyr, s. f. a salt cellar; pl. -yn.  
sailjey, a. salt. 
ro hailjey, a. too salt. S  
sailjys, s. f. saltness. 
yn tailjys, s. the saltness. S 
e hailjid or hailjys, s. his saltness. S  
sollan, s. m. salt; pl. -yn. 
y tollan, s. the salt. S 
dy hollan, s. of salt. S 
sollanagh, a. saltish, salty. 
samark, s. a shamrock; pl. -yn.  
e hamark, [s.] his shamrock. S 
samarkagh, a. having shamrocks.  
samarkee, a. id., comp. and sup.  
sambyl, s. m. a sample; pl. 76 [i.e. sambil].  
e hambyl, s. his sample. S 
sampleyr, s. m. example, pattern, precedent 
for others to imitate. 
e hampleyr, s. his example. S 
sampleyragh, a. exemplary, sign; Num. 
xxvi. 10: As ren y thalloo fosley e beeal, as 
sluggey ad sheese cooidjagh marish Korah tra 
va’n cheshaght shen giarit jeh, as ren yn aile 
stroie daa cheead as jeih deiney as daeed: as 
haink ad dy ve raaue sampleyragh. And the 
earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them 
up together with Korah, when that company 
died, what time the fire devoured two hundred 
and fifty men: and they became a sign. 
sampleyree, a. id., comp. and sup.  
[n]eu-samp[l]eyrit, a. unexampled, 
unprecedented. 
sannish or sonnish, s. f. a whisper; pl. -yn. 
e hannish, s. his whisper. S 
sannish or sonnish, v. to whisper or 
susurrate; -agh, 77; -ee 80; -in, 88; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
sansheraght, v. whispering. 
sansherey, s. m. whisperer; pl. sansherryn. 
sansh or sanshit, a. annunciated. As, laa’l 
Moirrey ny Sansh. 
sap, s. f. a wisp, the outside of timber; pl. -yn. 
e hap, s. his wisp. S 
sar* or sare, v. command, enjoin; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. 
har or haree, v. did command or 
commanded; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; 
-ys, 94. S 
sarey, v. 
dy harey, v. to command or enjoin. S  
sarit, 85. commanded, enjoined. A 
ro harit, 85. too enjoined or commanded. S 
sarey, s. m. a command, precept or 
injunction; pl. 67 [change -ey to -aghyn]. 
fo-harey, adv. under command. 
sareyder, s. m. a commander; pl. -yn. 
e hareyder, s. his commander. S 
sarkyl, s. f. weed, sarcle. See also farchail.  
sarrah, s. m. sir, in contempt. 
Sauin, s. f. Hollantide, (from saue save) 
either from All Souls or All Saints Day, 
kept by the church of Rome on the first and 
the other on the second of November, to 
288 
S 
 
pray for the salvation of all souls and saints 
departed, to have them saved.  
yn Tauin, s, the hollandtide. S 
dy Hauin, of Hollantide, of the 1st of 
November, or as it is now, the 12th. S 
Souney, a. d. of November or Hollantide. 
Sauiney, a. d. See Souiney. 
saveen, s. f. slumber. 
saveen, v. id., -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
saveenagh, a. slumbering, sleepy; s. m. one 
that slumbers; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]. 
saveenee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
saveenys, s. f. supineness, sluggishness; pl. 
-yn. 
sawane, s. f. wash-brew. 
sooane, s. f. wash-brew; pl. -yn.  
sawm, s. f. a psalm; pl. -yn.  
saynt, s. f. covetousness, eagerness after gain. 
It is also used when the plough is set to 
gripe the land too much; pl. -yn. 
yn taynt, s. the covetousness. S 
yn thaynt oc, s. their covetousness; Psalms, 
lxxviii. 19: Ren ad Jee y hrial ayns nyn 
greeaghyn: as hirr ad bee son y thaynt oc. 
They tempted God in their hearts: and required 
meat for their lust. [S] 
dty haynt, s. thy covetousness. S 
nyn daynt, s. your, &c. covetousness. S 
sayntoil, a. covetous, lustful. 
sayntoilagh, a. covetous, voraciously eager 
after gain; s. m. a covetous person; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. 
ro hayntoilagh, a. too covetous. S 
sayntoilee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
scaa, s. m. a shade, a shadow. 
scaa[-]liaghee, s. f. an umbrella, a shade to 
cast off rain. 
scaaghey, v. shadowing; Heb. ix. 5: As er-y-
skyn ny cherubim dy ghloyr scaaghey yn stoyl-
myghin: mychione oc cha vod mayd nish coyrt 
slane coontey. And over it the cherubims of 
glory shadowing the mercyseat; of which we 
cannot now speak particularly. 
scaalley, s. m. a scale; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
scaaillagh, a. scaly, squamous. 
scaaillee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
scaallit, a. covered with scales. 
scaan, s. an apparition, a ghost, a spectre, a 
spirit; pl. -yn; Luke, xxiv. 37: Agh v’ad 
seaghnit ayns nyn aigney as agglit, as heill ad 
dy nee scaan v’ad dy akin. But they were 
terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they 
had seen a spirit, and Mat. xiv. 26: As tra 
honnick ny ostyllyn eh shooyll er y cheayn, v’ad 
atchimagh, gra, She scaan t’ayn; as deïe ad 
magh ayns aggle. And when the disciples saw 
him walking on the sea, they were troubled, 
saying, It is a spirit; and they cried out for fear. 
scaanjoon, s. f. a phantom, a skeleton; pl. 
-yn.  
scaaney, s. m. a crack, flaw, or fissure; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn].  
scaant, 85. cracked, having flaws. 
scadoo, s. shadow, dark shade. 
scadooagh, a. shadowing, shady. 
scadooee, a. more shady, most shady. 
scammalt, s. m. a scaffold; pl. -yn.  
scammylt, s. f. scandal, reproach, defamation.  
scammyltagh, a. scandalous, reproachful, 
infamous, vile, disgraceful; s. m. a person 
who defames or reproaches; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee].  
scammyltey, v. 
dy scammyltey, v. to scandal or reproach. 
scammyltit, 85. scandalized, &c. 
scammyltid or scammyltys, s. f. 
disgracefulness, scandalousness. 
scansh, s. f. regard, consequence, respect. 
scansh-smoo, a. important. 
scansh-vooar, s. f. importance. 
neu-scansh, s. f. disregard, disesteem. 
scanshoil, a. regardful, &c. 
scape, s. m. an escape, a shield; pl. -yn. 
scap* or scape, v. escape<d>; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. 
scaap, v. did escape; 1 Sam. xix. 12: Er 
shoh lhig Michal David sheese trooid uinniag: 
as hie eh er-chea, as shoh myr scaap eh. So 
Michal let David down through a window: and 
he went, and fled, and escaped. 
scapail, v. escaping.  
er scapail, v. hath, &c. escaped. 
289 
S 
 
scapit, 85. escaped, avoided, untaken. 
scapaltagh, s. m. one who escapes; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. 
scar or scarr* v. separate, disperse, sever; 
sometimes used instead of the word spread; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
scarrey, v. separating, spreading, 
disuniting, disjoining, severing;  
scarrit or scarrt, 85. separated.  
scarreyder, s. m. a separator; pl. -yn. 
scarrey, s. m. a separation, a disunion; pl. 
67 [change -ey to -aghyn]. 
scarree, a. d. of separation or severance. 
scarrey veih yn agglish, s. f. schism. 
scarleod, s. m. scarlet, a red colour. 
scarrag, s. f. a skate or ray fish; pl. -yn. 
scell, s. m. a beam or ray of light; pl. -yn. 
scell-greiney, s. m. a sun-beam. 
scelt, v. cleave asunder; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
skeilt, v. split or rent; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
scelt, 85. cloven, split, bursted. 
neu-scelt, uncloven, uncleaved. 
skeilt-chassagh, a. cloven-footed. 
scelteyder, s. m. a cleaver, a splitter; pl. 
-yn. 
skeiltan, s. m. a lath; pl. -yn. 
scolt, v. split; -agh, 77; -ys, 88. 
scoltey, v. splitting. 
scoltey, s. m. a split or burst; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn]. 
scolteyder, s. m. one who splits. 
schimmeig, s. f. a streak or stripe; pl. -yn. 
schimmeig, v. streak, stripe, variegate; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
schimmeigey, v. streaking, variegating. 
schimmeigit, 85. streaked, striped. 
schimmeigeyder, s. m. one who streaks, 
&c. 
schimmeigagh, a. having streaks, stripes; 
variegated, how streaked, &c. 
schimmeigee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
schleï, s. f. skill, art, dexterity. 
schleïal or schleïoil, a. skilful, artful, 
ingenious, dexterous. 
neu-schleïoil, unskilful. 
schoill, s. m. a school; 2 Kings, xxii. 14: Myr 
shen hie Hilkiah yn saggyrt, as Ahikam, as 
Achbor as Shaphan, as Asahiah gys Huldah yn 
phadeyr, ben Shallum mac Tikvah, mac 
Harhas, va harrish ny coamraghyn casherick; 
(nish v’ee cummal ayns Jerusalem ayns 
schoill ny phadeyryn;) as ghow ad coyrle j’ee. 
So Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam, and Achbor, 
and Shaphan, and Asahiah, went unto Huldah 
the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of 
Tikvah, the son of Harhas, keeper of the 
wardrobe; (now she dwelt in Jerusalem in the 
college;) and they communed with her; pl. -yn. 
schoillar, s. m. f. a scholar; pl. -yn. 
scoarnagh, s. f. the throat; pl. 72 [change 
-agh to -eeyn]. 
scoarnee, a. d. of the throat. 
scobbey, s. m. a snack, a repast; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn]. 
scoadey, s. a sloop, a smack; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn]. 
scoidan, s. m. the sheet of a sail; pl. -yn. 
scoidey, s. m. obliqueness, aslope, askew. 
croan[-]scoidey, s. m. a boom. 
lieh-scoadey, a. slopewise, obliquely. 
scoigh, s. f. squeam, disgust; pl. -yn. 
scolb, v. chip, break the shell; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
scolbey, v. chipping; stirring to rise from 
bed. 
scolbit, 85. chipped, &c. 
scold, [v.] scald; -agh, 77; &c. 
scoldey, v. scalding. 
scoldit, 85. scalded.  
scoldey, s. m. a scald; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
scoldee, a. d. of scalding. 
gorley-scoaldee, s. the lues venerea. 
scollag, s. m. a stripling, a boy in a state 
subject to stripes, as stripling implies. The 
Manks etymology might be one fit for 
school or a scholar.  
shenn-scollag-aeg, s. m. a bachelor. 
290 
S 
 
scoilg, s. m. f. a slender grown child. 
skiolg, s. m. (from s’keyl), a slender youth. 
scoodyn, s. f. a nasty scruff or scum, found on 
vessels which are not kept properly clean; 
pl. -yn. 
scooir, v. scour or scrub; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87 -ys, 88. 
scooirey, v. scouring, scrubbing. 
scooirt, 85. scoured. 
scooirey, s. m. a scouring; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn]. 
scooiree, a. d. of scouring. 
scooireyder, s. m. a scourer; pl. -yn. 
scooyr, s. f. drunkenness, intoxication. 
scooyrit, a. drunk, intoxicated.  
scowan, s. f. a lung or light; pl. -yn. 
scoylg, s. f. a shriek; pl. -yn.  
scoylg, v. shriek; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
scoylgey, v. shrieking. 
scoylgernee, v. cackling as a hen.  
scoylgit, 85. shrieked. 
scoylgeyder. s. m. a shrieker. 
scoylgagh, a. to be shrieking often. 
scrabey, v. scratching or scraping. 
scrabit, 85. scratched, scraped. 
scrabeyder, s. m. a scraper, &c. 
scrabage, s. f. a scratch; pl. scrabaghyn. 
scraig, s. f. a scraw; pl. -yn. 
scraaee, a. d. of scraws. 
scra-chraaee, s. f. a quagmire, a shaking 
bog. 
scraig, v. -agh, 77; -it, 85; -ys, 88. 
scra or scraigey, v. scrawing; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88.  
scraigey, [v.] covering with scraws. 
scraait, 85. covered with scraws. 
scraigeyder, s. m. one who scraws. 
screau, s. f. a kiln last, as much corn as is put 
on the kiln to dry at once; pl. -yn. 
screb, s. f. scab; pl. -yn. 
screbbagh, a. scabby, how scabby. Prov. 
“Ta un cheyr[r]ey screbbagh doghaney yn 
clane shioltane.” [One scabby sheep 
inflects the whole flock.] 
scre[b]bee, a. id., comp. and sup.  
screbbid, s. m. scabbedness, scabbiness. 
scred, s. f. a gasp; pl. -yn. 
screeagh, a. screech; Isaiah, xxxiv. 14: …nee 
yn hullad-screeagh myrgeddin fastee y ghoaill 
ayns shen, as ynnyd fea y gheddyn er e son 
hene. … the screech owl also shall rest there, 
and find for herself a place of rest. 
scragh, s. f. a scream; pl. -yn. 
screeb, s. f. a scratch or scrape. This is nearly 
of the same meaning as scrabage, but, 
perhaps with this difference that screeb is 
the action of several sharps drawn over, 
scrabage but of only one sharp;  
screeb, [v.] -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
screebey, v. scratching or scratting. 
screebit, 85. scratched, scraped. 
screebeyder, s. m. a scratcher; pl. -yn. 
scribider, s. m. a grater; pl. -yn. 
screeu, scrieu, or scriu, v. write, scribble, 
wrote; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
screeut or scruit, 85. written, scribbled. 
screeuee, a. d. of writing or penmanship; as 
fedjag-screeuee (a pen); Psalm, xlv. 2: Ta 
my hengey myr fedjag-screeuee: yn scrudeyr 
tappee. My tongue is the pen: of a ready writer.  
laue-scriuee, s. f. manuscript. 
far-screeu, or far-scrieu, s. m. forgery; pl. 
-yn. 
far-scrieuder, s. m. a forger; pl. -yn. 
screeudeyr or scrudeyr, s. m. a scribe, 
writer or scribbler; pl. -yn.  
screeueyr[y]s, s. f. writing, penmanship. 
screeuyn, s. m. a letter, an epistle; Acts, xv. 
23: As hug ad screeuyn lhieu er yn aght shoh. 
And they wrote letters by them after this 
manner. pl. screeunyn.  
scriptyr, s. m. scripture; pl. -yn. “Te coontit 
tushey ooasle dy hoiggal leighyn as 
cliaghtaghyn y çheer ta dooinney cummal 
ayn. Agh cre wooad s’ooasle eh dy hoiggal 
slattyssyn niau as leighyn beaynid dy bragh 
farraghtyn ta ain ayns ny scriptyryn 
casherick.” [’Tis accounted noble 
knowledge to understand the laws and 
customs of the country wherein man 
291 
S 
 
dwells. But how much more noble it is to 
understand the statutes of heaven and the 
laws of everlasting eternity we have in the 
Holy Scriptures.] 
scriptyragh, a. scriptural. 
scrobbag, s. f. the crop of a fowl, a gizzard; 
pl. -hyn; Lev. i. 16: As gow-ee eh ass ny 
scrobbaghyn echey marish y chlooie, as tilgey 
ad rish yn altar er y cheu har, liorish ynnyd y 
leoie. And he shall pluck away his crop with his 
feathers, and cast it beside the altar on the east 
part, by the place of the ashes. 
scrobbaghyn, s. pl. the dewlap of oxen. 
scrod, v. screw; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ym, 86; -ys, 88. 
scrodey, v. screwing. 
scrodit, 85. screwed. 
scrodeyder, s. m. a screwer; pl. -yn. 
scroda, s. f. a screw; pl. -ghyn. 
scroo. See scroda. 
scroig, s. f. a crust, a scruff; pl. -yn. 
scruin, s. f. swarm of bees. 
scryss, s. m. a pareing, a shaving. 
scriss-ny-greg, s. f. a moss that grows on 
rocks, and is used in dying red. 
far-scryss, s. m. the scarfskin or furfur, the 
cuticle, the scruff or dandriff. 
scriss, v. pare, shave; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88 
scrissey, v. pareing, shaving. 
scrist, 85. pared, chaft, shaved.  
scrisseyder, s. m. a parer, a shaver. 
scrissan, s. m. a pareing, a thin skin or 
scum. 
scudlagh, s. m. a luggage. pl. 72 [change 
-agh to -eeyn]. 
scugh, v. remove, move, shift; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
scughey, [v]. removing, &c. 
scughit, 85. shifted, removed, moved. 
scughey, s. m. removal; pl. 67 [change -ey 
to -aghyn].  
scugheyder, s. m. a remover; pl. -yn. 
scuirr, v. cease, desist, leave off; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
Prov. “Tra scuirrys y laue dy choyrt 
scuirrys yn veeal dy voylley.” [When the 
hand ceases to give, the mouth ceases to 
praise.] 
er-scuirr, v. hath &c. ceased or left off. 
scuirreyder, s. m. one who ceases, &c. 
scuitçh, v. scourge; -agh, 77; -al, 79; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. 
scuitçheyder, s. m. a scourger; pl. -yn. 
scummey, adv. what matter, no matter, would 
not matter. 
scuyr, s. m. a skewer; pl. -yn. 
scuyr, v. -agh, 77; -al, 79; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -yn, 88. 
scuyreyder, s. m. one who skewers. 
seaghin or seaghyn, s. m. affliction, sorrow, 
grief, trouble, agitation. This word comes 
from seiy (to agitate).  
e heaghyn, s. his trouble or affliction. S 
seaghin or seaghyn, v. afflict, trouble, 
grieve, &c.; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
heaghn* or heaghnee, v. did trouble or 
agitate; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. 
S  
seaghney, v. afflicting, troubling. 
dy heaghney, v. to trouble, afflict, or 
agitate. S  
seaghnit, 85. grieved, troubled, &c. 
ro heaghnit, 85. too troubled or afflicted. S  
seaghneyder, s. m. one who afflicts or 
troubles. 
e heaghneyder, s. his troubler. S  
seaghinagh or seaghynagh, a. afflictive, 
grievous, sorrowful, troublesome. 
seihll, s. f. world; for the gender of this see 
Job ix. 24: Ta’n seihll er ny choyrt ayns laue 
ny mee-chrauee… The earth is given into the 
hand of the wicked. [NB. the example shows 
rather masculine gender]; time in the world, 
a man’s life-time in the world; pl. -yn.  
y teihll, s. (from seihll) the world. S 
theihll, s. See also teihll. 
e heihll, s. his time in the world; his world; 
laghyn-e-heill (days of his life). S  
cre-theihll, <adv.> [pron.] whatever, where 
ever. 
seihill, a. d. of the world. 
292 
S 
 
seihllt, a. d. of the world, worldly. 
seihlltagh, a. of or belonging to the world; 
secular, corporeal; how worldly; opposed to 
spyrrydoil; s. m. a worldling. 
ro hei<g>hlltagh, a. too worldly. S  
seihlltee, a. id., comp. and sup; s. 
worldlings. 
neu-heihlltagh, a. immaterial, incorporal. 
seihlltid or seihlltys, s. worldliness or 
worldly-mindedness. 
e heihlltid, s. his worldliness, his worldly 
mindedness. S 
seiy, s. m. a shank, that part of an instrument 
that goes into the handle; a push or shove, a 
thrust. 
seigh, s. m. a mix or stir. Quallian jeh’n 
cheid seigh (a pup of the first litter); pl. 
-yn.  
seiy, v. to push or shove; -agh, 77; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
heiy, v. did push, toss, agitate, mix, &c.; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. S 
dy heiy, v. to mix, stir, push, &c. S  
seiyt, 85. stirred, mixed, muddy, agitated, 
troubled, rolled; Isa. ix. 5: Son ta dy 
chooilley vagher-caggee yn treanagh lesh 
tharmane boiragh, as garmadyn seiyt ayns 
fuill; agh bee shoh lesh lostey, as stoo son yn 
aile. For every battle of the warrior is with 
confused noise, and garments rolled in blood; 
but this shall be with burning and fuel of fire. 
ro heiyt, 85. too agitated, mixed, muddy, 
&c. S 
laue my height, s. m. a hand suit, bound to 
prosecute by giving the hand to the coroner 
or lockman on searching for stolen goods. 
seiyeyder or seiyder, s. m. an agitator, a 
mixer. 
sei[y]jagh, a. agitat[i]ous; sore; Micah, ii. 
10: Trog-jee erriu, as gow-jee reue, son cha 
nee shoh yn ynnyd-vaghee eu: er-yn-oyr dy vel 
eh neu-ghlen, nee eh shiu y stroie lesh 
stroialtys seiyjagh. Arise ye, and depart; for 
this is not your rest: because it is polluted, it 
shall destroy you, even with a sore destruction. 
sessenagh, s. m. a sergeant, a sexton; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. 
ny hessenagh, s. a sexton or sergeant. S 
sett, s. f. a plant, a piece of potato to plant; Ez. 
xvii. 5: Ghow eh myrgeddin sett jeh mess y 
cheer, as phlant eh eh ayns magher messoil, 
hoie eh eh myr billey-shellagh liorish ushtaghyn 
mooarey. He took also of the seed of the land, 
and planted it in a fruitful field; he placed it by 
great waters, and set it as a willow tree.; pl. 
-yn. 
sett, v. plant; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
settal, v. planting, setting. 
settit, 85. planted, set.  
seyir, s. m. a carpenter, a wright, a joiner. 
yn teyir, s. the carpenter. S 
e heyir, s. his carpenter; pl. -yn. S 
seyirey, a. d. of a carpenter or wright. 
sieyr, s. pl. carpenters, joiners, wrights; the 
pl. of seyir; 2 Kings, xxii. 6: Da ny sieyr, as 
da ny mainshtyryn obbree, as masoonee, dy 
chionnaghey fuygh as claghyn cummit, dy 
yannoo seose yn thie. Unto carpenters, and 
builders, and masons, and to buy timber and 
hewn stone to repair the house. 
seyir-clagh, s. m. a mason; Galic. 
sieyr-clagh, s. pl. masons.  
seyir-queeyl, s. m. a wheelwright. 
seyirsnys, s. f. carpentry. 
seyr, a. free, clear, at liberty; dooiney seyr (a 
gentleman, a man clear of labour, an 
independent person).  
aigney-seyr, s. m. free will. 
ben-seyr, s. f. a gentlewoman. 
yn ven heyr s. the gentlewoman. S  
dooinney-seyr, s. m. a gentleman. 
seyrey, a. pl. clear<, justify>. 
seyr, v. to free, clear, or set at liberty, to 
justify; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
heyr, s. did free, set at liberty, justify, clear, 
&c.; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94 S  
seyrey, v. 
dy heyrey, v. to justify, free, clear, &c. S  
seyrit, 85. justified, freed, cleared. 
ro heyrit, 85. too justified, freed, &c. S 
seyrsnys, s. f. freedom, justification. 
sgairt, s. f. the midriff or diaphragm, a 
partition; pl. -yn.  
shag, s. m. a cormorant; pl. -yn. A low word. 
293 
S 
 
shaghey, adv. by, dy gholl shaghey (to pass 
by). 
shaghey, pre. past, past by. 
shaghey-eh-hene, adv. out of his senses or 
reason. 
cur shaghey 
dy chur-shaghey, v. to adjourn. C.  
lhiggit-shaghey, 85. postponed, 
procrastinated, let by, delayed. 
shaghym, p. by me, past me (shaghey 
aym). 
shaghin, p. past us, by us (shaghey ain). 
shaghyd, s. by thee, past thee, a contraction 
of shaghey ayd. 
shaghn or shaghin, v. shun, avoid, eschew, 
spare, escape; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
shaghyn, v. shun. Prov. “Shaghyn dagh 
olk.” [Shun each evil.] 
haghn or haghnee, v. did spare, spared, 
shunned, or evaded; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. S  
shaghney, v. shunning, avoiding, &c.; pl. 
67 [change -ey to -aghyn]. 
dy haghney, v. to spare, shun or eschew. S 
shaghnit, 85. spared, shunned, avoided. 
shaghneyder, s. m. a sparer, shunner, &c.; 
pl. -yn. 
shaghryn, v. See er-shaghryn. 
er-shaghryn, v. astray, bewildered, 
bewrayed [sic, see OED], having erred 
from the right way.  
shaghrynagh or shaghyrnagh, s. m. an 
estray, one astray. 
shaghrynys, s. f. the state of being astray, 
or out of proper mind or senses, confusion; 
Gen. xi. 7: Tar-jee, lhig dooin goll sheese, as 
ayns shen coyrt shaghrynys er y ghlare oc, 
nagh vod yn derrey-yeh toiggal glare yn jeh 
elley. Go to, let us go down, and there 
confound their language, that they may not 
understand one another’s speech; deviation, 
error; James, v. 20: Lhig da fys ’ve echey, dy 
jean eshyn ta chyndaa yn peccagh veih 
shaghrynys e raad, sauail annym veih baase, 
as ymmodee peccaghyn y choodaghey. Let 
him know, that he which converteth the sinner 
from the error of his way shall save a soul from 
death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. 
shaghrynys credjue, s. heresy; Acts, xxiv. 
5: Ta shin er gheddyn yn dooinney shoh fer 
erskyn towse boiragh, as doostey anvea 
mastey ooilley ny Hewnyn er feaï-ny-cruinney, 
as ny ard-leeideilagh ayns shaghrynys 
credjue ny Nazarenee. For we have found this 
man a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition 
among all the Jews throughout the world, and a 
ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes. 
shalee, s. f. quest, pursuit, design. 
e halee, s. his quest or pursuit. S 
shallid, s. f. the twinkling of an eye; pl. -yn. 
e hallid, s. his twinkling. S 
shalmane, s. a mushroom, fungus, club-top, 
frog-cheese; pl. -yn. 
e halmane (sic: stress), s. his mushroom. S 
shamyr, s. f. a chamber; pl. -yn. 
e hiamyr, s. his chamber. S  
shamyrder, s. m. a chamberlain; 2 Kings, 
xxiii. 11: As ghow eh ersooyl ny cabbil va 
reeaghyn Yudah er chasherickey gys y ghrian, 
ec giat thie yn Chiarn, liorish shamyr Nathan-
melech yn shamyrder, cheu-mooie jeh’n ard-
valley, as ren eh lostey fainee yn ghrian lesh 
aile. And he took away the horses that the 
kings of Judah had given to the sun, at the 
entering in of the house of the Lord, by the 
chamber of Nathanmelech the chamberlain, 
which was in the suburbs, and burned the 
chariots of the sun with fire. Esth. ii. 15: Nish 
tra va coorse Esther, inneen Abihail, naim 
Mordecai (va er ghoaill ee son e lhiannoo hene) 
er jeet mygeayrt dy gholl stiagh gys y ree, cha 
hir ee veg, agh ny ren Hegai shamyrder y ree, 
va currym ny mraane er phointeil. Now when 
the turn of Esther, the daughter of Abihail the 
uncle of Mordecai, who had taken her for his 
daughter, was come to go in unto the king, she 
required nothing but what Hegai the king’s 
chamberlain, the keeper of the women, 
appointed; pl. -yn. 
shiameyder, s. m. See shamyrder. 
shang, a. lank, lean, empty, not swelled or 
puffed out. This word is very expressive of 
the state; Gen. xli. 21, where the English is 
“ill favoured”: As tra v’ad erreish gee ad, cha 
row eh ry-akin orroo, dy row ad er n’ee ad, agh 
v’ad kinjagh cha shang as v’ad roie. And when 
294 
S 
 
they had eaten them up, it could not be known 
that they had eaten them; but they were still ill 
favoured, as at the beginning; and in Isa. xvii. 
4: As hig eh gy-kione ayns y laa shen, dy bee 
gloyr Yacob jeant thanney, as riurid e challin 
jeant shang. And in that day it shall come to 
pass, that the glory of Jacob shall be made 
thin, and the fatness of his flesh shall wax lean. 
shangey, a. pl. lank not plump. 
ro hang, a. too lank or empty bellied. S 
shang, v. to be lank, lean, not plump; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88. 
shangagh, v. getting lank, less in bulk or 
thickness, getting shrunk, and not so full or 
plump.  
dy hangagh, v. to become lank. S  
shangit, 85. shrunk, or grown lank. 
shangid, s. m. lankness, emptiness of the 
belly or bowels, inanition, leanness; Job, 
xvi. 8: As t’ou er my choodaghey lesh 
craplagyn, ta feanish m’oï: as ta’n shangid, ta 
ry-akin orrym, gymmyrkey feanish gys my 
eddin. And thou hast filled me with wrinkles, 
which is a witness against me: and my 
leanness rising up in me beareth witness to my 
face. 
e hangid or hangys, s. his lankness. S  
shanglane, s. m. one that is lank or empty. 
e hanglane, s. his lank creature; S  
shanglaney, v. becoming empty bellied. 
shanglanit, 85. shrunken by want of food. 
shanglanid, s. m. the state of being empty. 
shanglanagh, a. empty bellied, comp. and 
sup.; s. m. an empty person or beast; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. 
ro hanglaneagh, s. too lank or empty 
bellied. S 
shapp, s. f. a shop; pl. -yn.  
yn çhapp, s. 5. the shop. S 
e hap, s. his shop. S 
sharkagh. s. m. a porpoise; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee]. 
sharmane, s. f. a sermon; pl. -yn. 
e harmane, s. his sermon. S 
çharmane, a. d. of Germane. (sic) C  
sharmane-vuck, s. f. sow thistle. See also 
onnane meein.  
sharmaney, v. preaching sermons. 
sharmanagh, a. sermonlike; s. m. one who 
preaches sermons, a preacher; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. 
sharragh, s. m. a foal; pl. 71 [change -agh to 
-ee]. 
e harragh, s. his foal. S  
sharree 
çharree, a. d. 5. of foals, as Ballaçharree. 
S 
harree, a. d. of a foal or foals; as, laair 
harree. S 
sharroo, a. bitter, acrid, comp. and sup. 
ro harroo, a. too bitter. S 
shirroo, a. more or most bitter; the comp. 
and sup. of sharroo; Eccl. vii. 26: As hooar 
mee ny shirroo na’n baase yn ven ta’n cree 
eck ribbaghyn as lieenteenyn, as e laueyn myr 
geulaghyn: quoi-erbee ta dy wooiys Jee 
shaghnys ee, agh bee’n drogh yantagh goit 
lioree. And I find more bitter than death the 
woman, whose heart is snares and nets, and 
her hands as bands: whoso pleaseth God shall 
escape from her; but the sinner shall be taken 
by her. 
sherruid, s. bitterness; pl. -yn. 
dy herriuid, s. of bitterness. S 
shartanse, a. several. See also shiartanse. 
shiartanse, a. several. See also shartanse. 
yn çhiartanse, s. 5. the several. S 
e hiartanse, s. his several. S 
sharvaant, s. f. a servant; pl. -yn.  
yn çharvaant, s. 5. the servant. S 
e harvaant, s. his servant. S 
shaslagh, s. f. bent-grass; pl. -yn. 
dy hasslagh, s. of bent. S 
shaslee, a. d. of bent-grass. 
shass, v. stand, stop; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
hass, v. did stand, stood; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. S 
hass ee, p. she stood. 
shassoo, v. standing. 
dy hassoo, v. to stand. S  
shass, s. 
shass-greiney geuree, s. the winter 
solstice. 
shass-greiney souree, s. the summer 
solstice. 
295 
S 
 
shassoo, s. m. erection; pl. -yn. 
shasseyder, s. m. a stander; pl. -yn. 
shast, a. sterile, barren, dry. See also shiast. 
shiast, a. dry, steril[e], barren, not giving 
milk. 
shiastey, a. pl. idem. 
boandyr shast, a dry nurse. 
booa hiast, a. a dry cow, a cow that does 
not give milk. S  
hast. See hiast.  
shawk, s. f. the hawk or glede; Deu. xiv. 13: 
As yn shawk, as y shyrragh, as y vulture lurg e 
cheint. And the glede, and the kite, and the 
vulture after his kind.  
shawm, s. m. the cornet; pl. -yn; Psl. 
[x]cvii[i]. [7]: Lesh cayrnyn myrgeddin as 
shawmyn: O jeeagh-jee shiu hene gennal 
kiongoyrt rish y Chiarn y Ree. With trumpets 
also and shawms: O shew yourselves joyful 
before the Lord the King. 
shayll, s. f. succession, rotation, gradation, 
turn about, first come first served; Esth. i[i]. 
12: Nish tra haink shayll dagh moidyn 
mygeayrt, dy gholl stiagh gys ree Ahasuerus, 
erreish j’ee v’er ve daa vee jeig, cordail rish 
cliaghtey mraane… Now when every maid’s 
turn was come to go in to king Ahasuerus, after 
that she had been twelve months, according to 
the manner of the women….  
dty hayll, s. thy turn in rotation. S 
sheadin or sheading, s. f. a division into six, 
as the Island is; the district of a coroner 
from shey-rheynn.  
sheain or shee-ain, s. p. peace to us; a prayer 
for the peace and blessing of God. 
sheain eh mie orrin, in. an interjection of 
wonder or surprise, praying that God might 
diffuse his good peace on or among us. 
sheayn ny mea, in. (probably a contraction 
of shee ayns nyn mea) peace in your life, 
peace be to ye. Prov. “Sheayn dty hie as dty 
aaght ta’n fer driaght ec dty ghorrys.” 
[Peace to thy house and thy lodging, the 
chainer is at the door. (Or, preferably, 
Peace on thy house and lodging, the officer 
of justice is at thy door.)] 
sheayn, v. 
heayn or heaynee, v. did pray or ejaculate; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. S  
sheayney, v. praying ejaculatory prayers; 
as, shee Yee dy row marin, shee Chreest 
hooin, &c. [The peace of God be with us, 
the peace of Christ to us.] 
dy heayney, v. to pray or ejaculate for 
protection, peace, &c. S 
sheaynt, 85. blest with peace; thalloo 
sheaynt (land of peace); Jer. xii. 5: My t’ou 
er roie rish coshee, as t’ad er n’yannoo skee 
jeed, kys eisht oddys oo cummal magh rish 
cabbil? as my t’ou tooillit oc ’sy thalloo 
sheaynt, raad va dty haitnys, eisht cre nee oo 
ayns thooillaghyn Yordan? If thou hast run with 
the footmen, and they have wearied thee, then 
how canst thou contend with horses? and if in 
the land of peace, wherein thou trustedst, they 
wearied thee, then how wilt thou do in the 
swelling of Jordan? In Amos, vii. 9, the 
sanctuaries are called thieyn sheaynt: As 
bee ard-ynnydyn Isaac nyn draartys, as bee 
thieyn-sheaynt Israel er ny chur naardey; as 
nee’m brishey magh noi thie Yeroboam lesh y 
chliwe. And the high places of Isaac shall be 
desolate, and the sanctuaries of Israel shall be 
laid waste; and I will rise against the house of 
Jeroboam with the sword. 
fer sheaynt (one who had performed)  
sheayney (peaceable).  
sheayneyder, s. m. one who performs 
ejaculations.  
sheane, s. f. a wen; Lev. xxii. 22: Doal, ny 
brisht, ny baccagh, ny lesh sheane, ny brooan, 
ny screb, cha jean shiu ad shoh y hebbal gys y 
Chiarn, ny oural lesh aile y yannoo jeu, er altar 
y Chiarn. Blind, or broken, or maimed, or 
having a wen, or scurvy, or scabbed, ye shall 
not offer these unto the Lord, nor make an 
offering by fire of them upon the altar unto the 
Lord; pl. -yn. 
sheanse, s. m. science; pl. -yn. 
sheckter, s. m. an executor; pl. -yn. 
sheckter-ayns-treisht, s. m. administrator. 
sheckteraght, s. f. goods, money, or effects 
left a person by will; a legacy. 
sheckterys, s. f. executorship. 
shee, s. f. peace; pl. -ghyn. 
y çhee, s. 5. the peace of the peace. S 
e hee, s. his peace S  
296 
S 
 
shee dy row marin, peace be with us. 
shee dy row mayrt, peace be with thee. 
shee dy ro[w] hiu, peace be to you. 
shee dy ro[w] meriu, peace be with you. 
shee dy vea, welcome 
shee dy vea dty valley, welcome to thy 
home. 
lhiannan-shee, s. f. a familiar spirit. 
sheeoil, a. peaceable, quiet, comp. and sup. 
or sheeoiley.  
sheeabin, s. m. soap; pl. -yn. 
e heeabyn, s. his soap. S  
sheeabinagh, a. soapy. 
ro heeabynagh, a. too soapy. S 
sheeabinee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
sheealtagh, s. m. a mediator, an intercessor, 
an appeaser. Bishop Wilson’s book on 
sacrament,14 page 40: She eshyn yn oural ain, 
nyn sheealtagh as nyn vendeilagh. He is our 
sacrifice, our mediator, our advocate; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
sheean, s. m. sound, noise, clamour. The 
Hebrew sheon is very like the Manks. The 
literality of this word would be shee (peace) 
and an, dim. (little peace).  
dty heean, s. thy sound or noise. S  
sheean, v. noise, sound, &c. Though this 
word is seldom used as a verb singly, it is 
sometimes used pronominally, and with the 
terminations; -agh; -al; -in; -ins; -it; -ym; 
& -ys, 88. 
sheeanagh, a. sonorous, sounding. 
ro heeanagh, a. too noisy. S 
sheeanane, s. f. accent; pl. -yn. 
sheeb, s. m. a blast of wind that drifts some 
thing before it; a sharp scold; pl. -aghyn. 
sheeb, v. drift, drive with wind; scold; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
heeb or heebb*, v. blew, blasted, did blow; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94; Hag. i. 
9: Va shiu jerkal rish mooarane, as cur-jee my-
ner, haink beggan jeh; as tra hug shiu lhieu thie 
eh, heeb mee ersooyl eh. Ye looked for much, 
and, lo it came to little; and when ye brought it 
                                                 
14 A Short and Plain Instruction for the Better 
Understanding of the Lord’s Supper…, Whitehaven: 
Ware, 1777. 
home, I did blow upon it. S  
sheebey, v. drifting before the wind, as 
snow, sand, &c.; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
er heebey, v. hath, &c. blown or blew away 
with the wind. S 
sheebit, 85. drifted, driven. 
ro heeblt, 85. too driven or drifted. S  
sheebeyder, s. m. a drifter; pl. -yn. 
sheebane, s. m. the continuation of a blast 
of wind, &c., that drives; the dim. of sheeb; 
pl. -yn.  
e heebane (sic: stress), s. his wind, or thing 
driven with the wind. S  
sheeidey, s. m. silk; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
yn çheeidey, s. 5. the silk. S 
dy heeidey, s. of silk, silken. S 
sheeidagh, a. d. silken, of silk. 
sheeiney or sheeint, s. f. a teat, dug, nipple, 
pap; first pl. 67 [change -ey to -aghyn], last 
pl. -yn. 
yn çheeiney or çheeint, s. 5. the teat or 
dug, the pap or nipple. S 
dty heeiney, or heeint, s. thy teat or dug. S 
sheeintagh, a. papillous, having paps or 
teats, mammeated. 
sheel, s. m. oats, from the time it is threshed 
till sown, or dried for the mill. This word is 
for seed, Job, xxi. 8: T’ad fakin yn sheel oc 
bishaghey mâroo, as nyn sluight kiongoyrt rish 
nyn sooillyn. Their seed is established in their 
sight with them, and their offspring before their 
eyes; pl. -yn.  
yn çheel, s. 5. the oats. See sheel. S 
dy heel, s. of threshed oats. S 
sheel correy, s. m. seed oats.  
sheel, v. sober, filter, strain, sile, &c.; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
heel, v. filtered, did filter, did sneak away, 
-agh; -in; -ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. S  
heel, v. [sobered, did] sober, -agh; -in; -ins; 
-it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. S  
sheeley, v. straining, filtering, sneaking.  
dy heeley, v. to filter, sneak away, &c. S  
sheelaghey, v. sobering, filtering.  
dy heelaghey, v. to sober, &c. S  
sheelit, 85. filtered, strained.  
297 
S 
 
sheelt, a. sober, temperate. 
sheeltey, a. pl. sober, temperate, comp. and 
sup.  
neu-heelt, a. intemperate, inebriated. 
sheeleyder, s. m. one who strains, filters, 
&c.  
sheeltid, s. m. soberness. 
sheeltys, s. f. sobriety, temperance. 
dy heeltys, s. of soberness, of temperance. 
S 
sheeloghe, s. m. a generation, age; pl. -yn.  
yn çheeloghe (sic: stress), s. 5. the 
generation. S 
e heeloghe, s. his generation. S 
sheeyl, s. This word is used in the Manks 
translation of Milton’s Paradise Lost, for a 
contraction of sheelnaue, which see.  
sheelnaue, s. mankind, human beings. This 
word no doubt is from sheel (seed) as in 
Job, xxi. 8 [see above]; and naue a 
corruption of niau (heaven), the seed or 
offspring of heaven. 
dy heelnaue, s. of mankind. S 
sheeyn, v. stretch, extend, distend; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
heeyn, v. stretched, did stretch; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. S  
sheeyney, v. stretching. 
dy heeyney, v. to stretch. S  
sheeyney-magh, v. stretching out. 
sheeynt, 85. stretched, extended. 
ro heeynt, 85. too stretched. S 
sheeyney, s. m. a stretch; pl. 67 [change -ey 
to -aghyn]. 
sheeyneyder, s. m. a stretcher; pl. -yn. 
sheeynag, s. f. a line, a straight line. 
shegin, v. lurking for, lying in wait; Luke, xi. 
54: Lhie ayns farkiaght er e hon, as shegin er 
tayrtyn red ennagh ass e veeal son oyr plaiynt 
n’oi. Laying wait for him, and seeking to catch 
something out of his mouth, that they might 
accuse him. 
sheygin, v. watching for prey. See also 
shegin. 
sheh, s. f. hide, felt; pl. -ghyn.  
yn çheh, s. 5. the hide, the pate. Prov. 
“Shegin goaill ny eairkyn marish y çheh.” 
[’Tis necessary taking the horns with the 
hide.] S 
e heh, s. his hide. S 
nyn gheh [sic: see nyn jeh], s. your, &c. 
hide or pate. S 
nyn jeh, s. your, &c. hide. Sh 
sheid, s. m. a blow, blast or puff of wind; pl. 
-aghyn. 
sheid, v. blow, expel wind; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88.  
heid, v. blew, did blow; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. S  
sheidey, v. blowing.  
dy heidey, v. to blow. S  
sheidit, 85. blown.  
ro heidit, 85. too much blown. S  
sheidey, s. m. a windy or blowing time; pl. 
67 [change -ey to -aghyn]. 
sheidee, a. d. of blowing.  
heidee, a. d. of blowing. S  
builg-sheidee, s. f. bellows; Jer. vi. 29: Ta 
ny builg-sheidee losht, ta’n leoie er n’gholl 
naardey ’syn aile; ta’n lheeider lheïe ayns 
fardail; son cha vel ny meechrauee er ny 
ghaartlian ass. The bellows are burned, the 
lead is consumed of the fire; the founder 
melteth in vain: for the wicked are not plucked 
away. 
sheideyder, s. m. a blower; pl. -yn.  
sheillagh, s. f. salix, black willows or sally. 
pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee] [Isaiah, xliv. 4: 
As aasee ad seose myr maste’yn faiyr, as myr 
shellee rish ny coorseyn-ushtey. And they shall 
spring up as among the grass, as willows by 
the water courses.] 
dy heillagh, s. of sallow, sallix, of black 
sally. S  
sheillee or shellee, a. d. of salix or willow; 
<Isaiah, xliv. 4.> [See sheillagh.]  
shellee, a. d. See sheillee. 
heillee, a. d. of sallow or sallix. S 
shelg or sheilg, v. hunt, hunting; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. 
heilg or helg, v. did hunt, hunted; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. The first spelling 
is in Gen. xxvii. 30: As haink eh gy-kione, 
erreish da Isaac v’er choyrt e vannaght da 
298 
S 
 
Jacob, as scoan va Jacob er n’immeeaght veih 
fenish Isaac e ayr, dy daink Esau e vraar stiagh 
veih e heilg. And it came to pass, as soon as 
Isaac had made an end of blessing Jacob, and 
Jacob was yet scarce gone out from the 
presence of Isaac his father, that Esau his 
brother came in from his hunting., and the 
latter in Jer. xvi. 16: …as ver-ym fys er 
ymmodee shelgeyryn, as nee ad y helg ad veih 
dy chooilley lieau, as veih dy chooilley chronk, 
as veih guaggyn ny creggey. …and after will I 
send for many hunters, and they shall hunt 
them from every mountain, and from every hill, 
and out of the holes of the rocks. S  
shelgit, 85. hunted.  
shelgeyr, s. m. a hunter, pl. -yn. 
yn çhelgeyr (sic: stress), s. 5. the hunter, S 
e heilgeyr, s. his hunter. S  
shelge[y]rys, s. f. huntsmanship; pl. -yn. 
e heilgeyrys, s. his hunting. S 
shell* or shellagh, v. imagine, suppose, 
conjecture; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 
86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
heill, v. did suppose or imagine, supposed, 
imagined; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 
94. S  
sheiltyn or shein, v. supposing, 
conjecturing, thinking; Acts, xiv. 19: As 
haink shiartanse dy Hewnyn veih Antioch as 
Iconium, as chleaynee ad y pobble, as ren ad 
Paul y chlaghey as y hayrn magh ass yn ard-
valley, sheiltyn dy row eh marroo. And there 
came thither certain Jews from Antioch and 
Iconium, who persuaded the people, and 
having stoned Paul, drew him out of the city, 
supposing he had been dead. 
sheltyn, v. See sheiltyn. 
er heiltyn, v. hath, &c. supposed or 
imagined. S  
shellan, s. [m.] a bee; pl. -yn.  
yn çhellan, s. [m.] the bee. S  
e hellan, s. his bee; pl. -yn. S 
shellan-mooar, s. [m.] a large bee. 
kishan shellan, s. [m]. a bee hive. 
shelleig, s. f. a bee-hive; pl. -yn. 
shelley, s. saliva, spittle; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
yn çhelley, s. the saliva or spittle. S 
[e] helley, s. his saliva or spittle; pl. 67. S 
shelliu, s. f. salve; pl. -yn. 
yn çhielliu, s. 5. the salve; Jer. xlvi. 11: 
Immee seose gys Gilead, as gow yn chielliu 
costal, O voidyn, inneen Egypt. Go up into 
Gilead, and take balm, O virgin, the daughter of 
Egypt. S 
dy helliu, s. of salve; pl. -yn. S 
shelloo, s. a herd of cattle; pl. -yn. 
yn çhelloo, s. 5. the flock. S 
e helloo, s. his herd; pl. -yn. S 
shellym, v. 
hellym, <(from yllym),> [v.] blow<n>, 
wind<ed>, sound<ed>; 2 Chron. v. 13: 
Haink eh eer gy-kione, myr va ny trumpeteryn 
hellym lesh cayrnyn, as ny fir-chiaullee goll 
lesh y cheilley 'syn un chiaul, ayns coyrt 
moylley as booise da'n Chiarn… It came even 
to pass, as the trumpeters and singers were as 
one, to make one sound to be heard in praising 
and thanking the Lord…; 1 Cor. xv. 52: Ayns 
tullogh, ayns shallid, ec y chayrn s'jerree: (son 
bee'n cayrn er ny hellym, as bee ny merriu 
troggit seose gys y stayd nagh jed mow, as bee 
mayd er nyn gaghlaa). In a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: for the 
trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be 
raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed. 
Y 
shen, pro. adv. that, so, these, those, thence. 
shen bee eh, adv. so be it, amen. 
shen-y-fa, adv. therefore, wherefore. 
er-shen, adv. on that, thereon, thereupon. 
shenn, a. old, aged, senile. 
yn çhenn, s. 5. the old. S  
ny henn ghooinney; s. an old man. S 
shenn-ayr, s. m. fore-father, progenitor. 
shaner, s. m. grandfather; dty henn shaner 
(thy great-grandfather).  
shenn-shaner, s. m. great-grandfather. 
shenn-scollag-aeg, s. m. a bachelor. 
shenn-ven-aeg, s. f. an old maid. 
shinney, a. elder, eldest, senior; comp. and 
sup. of shenn. 
by hinney, a. senior, elder. S 
fer-shinney 
yn er-shinney, s. the eldest one, masculine. 
F 
shinneyid, s. m. seniority, oldness. 
shennid, s. m. oldness, senesence. 
299 
S 
 
e hennid, s. his seniority or old age. S  
shendiaght, s. m. age, old age, aged, the 
old, the aged. 
yn çhenndiaght, s. 5. the aged, the old. S 
shanstyr, s. m. a senator, an elder; pl. -yn.  
yn çhanstyr, s. 5. the senator or elder; Acts, 
iv. 23: As erreish da’n raad ve lhiggit daue, hie 
ad gys nyn sheshaght hene, as hug ad coontey 
daue jeh ooilley ny va ny ard saggyrtyn as y 
chanstyr er ghra. And being let go, they went 
to their own company, and reported all that the 
chief priests and elders had said unto them. S 
e hanstyr, s. his elder or senator. S 
sheshey, s. m. a companion, an equal, a mate, 
one of a pair, a match, a husband; Gen. iii. 
6: As tra honnick y ven dy row yn billey mie son 
beaghey: as aalin gys y thooill, as billey dy ve 
er ny yeearree dy yannoo creeney: ghow ee 
jeh’n vess, as ren ee gee; as hug ee myrgeddin 
da e sheshey va maree, as ren eshyn gee. 
And when the woman saw that the tree was 
good for food, and that it was pleasant to the 
eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one 
wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, 
and gave also unto her husband with her; and 
he did eat; pl. 67 [change -ey to -aghyn]. 
Prov. “Ta sheshey chammah as ayrn.” [A 
companion is as good as a share.] 
yn çheshey, s. 5. the companion. S 
e heshey, s. his companion, mate, equal, 
fellow, &c. S 
my ven-heshey, s. my wife; Job, xix. 17: Ta 
m’ennal dwoaiagh da my ven-heshey hene, ga 
dy ghuee mee urree er graih chloan my chorp 
hene. My breath is strange to my wife, though I 
intreated for the children’s sake of mine own 
body; all those words compounded with 
ben, (a woman or wife) might be here 
inserted, but the reader may refer to ben, 
and change them to ven, as required. B 
sheshee, a. d. of a companion or pl. 
Though this word is in Heb. x. 33, for 
companions, the plural of sheshey, I think 
sheshaghyn would be more correct: Ayns 
ayrn tra va shiu soit magh son shilley dy 
ghannidys daue, chammah liorish oltooanyn as 
seaghyn; as ayns ayrn tra va shiu nyn sheshee 
dauesyn hurr y dellal cheddin. Partly, whilst ye 
were made a gazingstock both by reproaches 
and afflictions; and partly, whilst ye became 
companions of them that were so used.  
e heshaghyn, s. his companions, fellows, 
equals, mates, matches. S 
my ven heshee, a. d. my affianced or 
betrothed wife; Gen. xxix. 21: As dooyrt 
Jacob rish Laban, Cur dou my ven, (son ta my 
hraa cooilleenit) dy vod ee ve my ven-heshee. 
And Jacob said unto Laban, Give me my wife, 
for my days are fulfilled, that I may go in unto 
her; in Job ii. 9, it is heshey: Eisht dooyrt e 
ven-heshey rish, Vel oo foast shassoo er dty 
ynrickys? Then said his wife unto him, Dost 
thou still retain thine integrity? S  
sheshaght, s. [f.] company, society; pl. -yn. 
yn çheshaght, s. 5. the company. Prov. 
“Myr sloo yn çheshaght share yn ayrn, Myr 
smoo yn çheshaght s’reaie yn chloie.” [The 
smaller the company the better the share; 
the bigger the company the merrier the 
play.] S  
e heshaght, s. his company; pl. -yn. S  
ry-heshaght, <v. to be> in company, 
accompanying. 
shesheragh or shesheraght, s. f. a team to 
plough with. Perhaps from being formerly 
made by partners; pl. 72 [change -agh or 
-aght to -eeyn].  
dty heshereeyn, s. thy plough teams. S 
yn çhesheraght, s. 5. the plough team. S  
e hesheraght, s. his plough team. S 
nyn jesheraght, s. your, &c. team to 
plough. Sh 
shesheree, a. d. of or belonging to a team 
to plough. 
greïe hesheree, s. a plough team gear. S  
çhesheree, a. d. 5. of the plough team. S 
shey, a. six; pl. -ghyn. 
e hey, s. his six; e heyjeig (his sixteen). S  
shey-jeig, a. sixteen. 
shey-jeigoo or sheyoo[-]yeig, a. sixteenth. 
sheyoo, a. sixth. 
yn çheyoo, s. 5. the sixth. S 
e heyoo, s. his sixth. S 
sheyn 
ny-sheyn, adv. presently, by and by. 
shiaght, a. seven; pl. -yn.  
yn çhiaght, s. 5. the seven. S 
e hiaght, s. his seven; pl. -yn. S  
300 
S 
 
shiaght[-]jeig, a. seventeen. 
dty hiaght[-]jeig, s. thy seventeen. S 
shiaght[-]jeigoo or shiaghtoo[-]yeig, a. 
seventeenth. 
shiaghtoo, a. seventh. 
yn çhiaghtoo, s. 5. the seventh. S 
shiaghtin, s. f. a week; pl. -yn or 72 
[change -in to -eeyn]. 
yn çhiaghtyn or yn çhiaghtin, s. 5. the 
week. S 
e hiaghtin, s. his week; pl. -yn. S  
shiaull, s. m. a sail; pl. shiauihll.  
shiauill, v. sail, float; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
hiauill, v. did sail, sailed; Acts, xxvii. 13: 
As feaysley lesh geay meeley jiass sheiltyn dy 
row oc nish nyn yioïn, hiauill ad ry lhiattee 
Crete. And when the south wind blew softly, 
supposing that they had obtained their purpose, 
loosing thence, they sailed close by Crete; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. S  
hioill, v. sailed; Mat. ix. 1: As ghow eh 
lhuingys, as hioill eh harrish, as haink eh gys e 
ard-valley hene. And he entered into a ship, 
and passed over, and came into his own city. 
See hiauill. S  
shiaulley, v. sailing, floating. 
shiaullagh or shiaullaghey, v. fixing, 
getting in order to sail, or to do any other 
work, getting equipped.  
shiaullee, a. d. of sailing or getting in 
order. 
leagh-shiaullee, s. fare, payment of 
passage; Jonah, i. 3: Agh dirree Jonah seose 
dy roie er-chea gys Tarshish veih fenish y 
Chiarn, as hie eh sheese gys Joppa; as hooar 
eh lhong goll gys Tarshish: myr shen deeck eh 
yn leagh-shiaullee, as hie eh er boayrd, dy 
gholl maroo gys Tarshish, veih fenish y Chiarn. 
But Jonah rose up to flee unto Tarshish from 
the presence of the Lord, and went down to 
Joppa; and he found a ship going to Tarshish: 
so he paid the fare thereof, and went down into 
it, to go with them unto Tarshish from the 
presence of the Lord. 
shiaullit, 85. set in order. 
shiault, 85. sailed, floated. 
shiaulleyder, s. m. a person who can set an 
instrument in order to work; pl. -yn. 
shiaulteyr or shiolteyr, s. m. a sailor; pl. 
-yn.  
ny hiaulteyr, s. a sailor. S  
shoalteyr, s. m. a sailor; [1] Kings, ix. 27: 
As hug Hiram ayns ny lhongyn e harvaantyn, 
shoalteyryn schleioil ayns shiaulley, marish 
sharvaantyn Solomon. And Hiram sent in the 
navy his servants, shipmen that had knowledge 
of the sea, with the servants of Solomon; pl. 
-yn. 
shiaulteyrys, s. f. sailorship, the business 
or craft of a sailor.  
shibbag 
yn çhibbag, s. f. 5. the gentle blow or tap; 
pl. -yn. <C.>[S.] 
shibber, s. m. supper; pl. -yn.  
“Dy ve aashagh syn oie,  
monney shibber nagh ee; 
er nonney n’oo plaiynt,  
ec laccal dty laynt.” [To be easy in the 
night, much supper don’t eat, or else you 
will complain at wanting your health.] 
And,  
“Shibber eddrym, lhiabbee ghlen.” [A light 
supper, a clean bed.] 
yn çhibber, s. 5. the supper. S 
e hibber, s. his supper; pl. -yn. S 
shibberagh, a. d. of supper, belonging to 
supper. 
shickyr, a. sure, certain, steadfast; stable, 
steady, fixed, fast, firm.  
dy shickyr, adv. surely, certainly, firmly, 
&c.  
shickyrey, a. pl. sure, certain, &c.  
shickyree, a. the comp. and sup. of shickyr. 
anshickyr, a. unsteady, unsure, inconstant, 
wavering. See also neuhickyr. 
neu-hickyr, a. unsure, unsteady, unstable. 
shickyr* or shickyree, v. make sure, &c.; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
hickyr* or hickyree, v. did make sure or 
certain; did establish, confirm, or fasten; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. S  
shickyragh or shickyraghey, v. making 
sure, fast, or certain. 
dy hickyragh or hickyraghey, v. to certify 
establish, or make sure. S  
shickyrit, 85. secured, established, made 
301 
S 
 
steadfast or sure. 
ro hickyrit, 85. too established, made too 
sure or certain. S  
shickyreyder, s. m. an affirmer, a securer. 
shickyrys, s. f. certainty, security, 
confidence.  
son shickyrys, adv. positively, confidently, 
assuredly. 
shid, adv. yonder, there.  
shill, v. shed, spill; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88,  
hill or hiyll, v. did drop or shed; did spill or 
drain; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. S  
hiyll, v. [did] shed, did drop, or drain. See 
also hill. S 
hyll, v. [did] shed, drop. See hill. S  
shilley, v. shedding, spilling, draining, 
dropping. 
dy hilley, v. to shed drop or drain. S 
dy hiylley, v. to shed. drop or drain. S 
shillit, 85. shed; drained. 
shillee, s. f. a mass or assemblage of thin 
slate, or bits of thin stone. 
shilleeid, s. f. a slug or soft snail; pl. -yn. 
e hilleeid, s. his slug or soft snail. S 
shilley, s. m. sight, look, view; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn]. 
dty hilley, s. thy sight, visit, or look S 
shillagh, a. d. of sight or sights. 
shilley-faggys, a. purblind. 
shilley-sooilley, s. [f.] eye-sight. 
shilley-yindyssagh, s. m. spectacle; 1 Cor. 
iv. 9: Son ta mee smooinaghtyn dy vel Jee er 
hoiaghey magh shinyn ny ostyllyn er-jerrey 
ooilley, myr deiney faagit mooie son baase. 
Son ta shinyn shilley yindyssagh da’n seihll, 
as da ainleyn, as da deiney. For I think that 
God hath set forth us the apostles last, as it 
were appointed to death: for we are made a 
spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to 
men. 
aa-hilley, s. m. second sight. 
ass-shilley, adv. out of sight. Prov. “Ass 
shilley ass smooinaghtyn.” [Out of sight, 
out of mind.] 
shillish, s. See çhillys. 
[yn] çhillys, s. f. 5. [the] cherry. See also 
shillish. 
shimmey, a. how many, many. 
cha nhimmey, a. not many. S  
shin, pro. we, us; -yn, id. em. 
shin-hene, pro. ourselves. 
shioltane, s. f. a flock; pl. -yn. 
yn çhioltane, s. 5. the flock. S 
e hioltane, s. his flock; pl. -yn. S  
shioltaney, v. flocking. 
dy hioltaney, v. to make into flocks. S 
shioltanagh, a. being in flocks. 
shir or shirr*, v. ask, seek, endeavour, 
require; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
hir or hirr*, v. did seek, or enquire, sought, 
besought, asked; Jud. v. 25: Hir eh ushtey, 
as hug ee da bainney; hoie ee roish eeym ayns 
claare stoamey. He asked water, and she gave 
him milk; she brought forth butter in a lordly 
dish; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. S  
shirrey, v. seeking, asking, endeavouring; 
pl. 67 [change -ey to -aghyn]. 
dy hirrey, v. to seek, ask &c. Prov. “Goll 
thie yn ghoayr dy hirrey ollan.” [Going to 
the goat’s house to seek wool.]  
shirrit or shirrt, 85. sought, desired, 
bidden, asked, invited, solicited, required. 
ro hirt, 85. too sought or besought. S  
shirrey, s. m. a request. 
shirreyder, s. m. an asker, seeker. 
shirk, v. shrink, dry up, contract, shrivel; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
hirk* or hirkee, v. did shrink, shrunk, or 
shrank; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. 
S  
shirkaghey, v. shrinking, shrivelling, &c. 
dy hirkagh or hirkaghey, v. to shrink, &c. 
S  
shirkit or shirgit, 85. shrivelled, shrunk. 
ro hirkit, 85. too shrunk. S  
shirkeyder, s. m. a shriveller. 
shirveish, s. m. service, servitude. 
yn çhirveish, s. 5. the service. S 
serveish, v. 
dy herveish, s. to serve, to minister. S 
shirveishagh, a. serviceable, &c.; s. m. one 
that serves or officiates; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee]. 
302 
S 
 
yn çhirveishagh, s. 5. the server, the 
minister. S 
e herveishagh, s. his server or officiater. S 
shiu, pro. ye, you; -ish, id. em. 
shlearagh, a. delaying, postponing, 
procrastinating time. 
shleayst, s. f. thigh, flank; pl. -yn; Lev. iii. 4: 
As yn daa aarey, as yn eeh t’orroo liorish ny 
shleaystyn, as y skairt erskyn yn aane marish 
ny aaraghyn; shen nee eh goaill ersooyl. And 
the two kidneys, and the fat that is on them, 
which is by the flanks, and the caul above the 
liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away. 
slheeayst, s. f. thigh; pl. -yn; Gen. xxiv. 9: 
As hug y stiurt e laue fo slheeayst Abraham e 
vainshtyr, as ren eh breearrey da, mychione y 
chooish shen. And the servant put his hand 
under the thigh of Abraham his master, and 
sware to him concerning that matter. 
yn cleeayst, or cleeaysid, s. the thigh. S 
e lheeayst, s. his thigh.  
ry-lheayst, adv. by the thigh, on the thigh; 
Cant. iii. 8: T'ad ooilley glackey nyn gliwenyn, 
aghtal ayns caggey, dagh dooinney as e chliwe 
ry-lheayst, son arrey ny hoie. They all hold 
swords, being expert in war: every man hath 
his sword upon his thigh because of fear in the 
night. 
slheeasid, a. d. of the thigh. [In the Bible, 
slheeasid is simply an alternative form for 
slhe(e)ayst.] 
e lheeasid, s. of his thigh; Gen. xxxii. 25: 
As tra honnick eh nagh chossyn eh er venn eh 
rish kione e lheeasid: as va slheeasid Yacob 
ass ynnyd, myr v’eh gleck rish. And when he 
saw that he prevailed not against him, he 
touched the hollow of his thigh; and the hollow 
of Jacob’s thigh was out of joint, as he wrestled 
with him. S 
shlee, a. more or most in number. 
slhee, a. more or most in number; Jud. xvi. 
30: Myr shen dy varr eh ny slhee ec e vaase, 
na v’eh er varroo ooilley e vea roïe. So the 
dead which he slew at his death were more 
than they which he slew in his life. Prov. “Myr 
sniessey da’n oie slhee mitçhoor.” [The 
nearer the night, the more rogues.] 
shleeu or shlieu, v. sharpen, whet; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -yn, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. 
shlieeu. See shleeu.  
shleeuit or shleeut, 85. sharpened, whetted; 
a. fain, keen, bent for. 
sleggan-sleeu, s. f. foxglove. 
shleeuee 
clagh-shleeuee, s. a whetstone. 
shleeuder, s. m. a sharpener; pl. -yn. 
shleiy, s. f. a spear, a scimitar, a short sword; 
pl. -ghyn. 
shliawin or shliawn, a. slippery, slape, or 
slapy; sly, insidious. 
shliawney, a. pl. slippery, slapy; Jer. xxiii. 
12: Shen-y-fa bee’n immeeaght oc myr raaidyn 
shliawney ’sy dorraghys; bee ad immanit er 
nyn doshiaght, as tuittee ad ayn. Wherefore 
their way shall be unto them as slippery ways in 
the darkness: they shall be driven on, and fall 
therein. 
shliawinagh or shliawnaghey, v. getting 
slippery. 
shliawnid or shliawnys, s. slipperiness, 
slapiness. 
shliee, v. lick or lap up; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
sliee, v. did lick. See also shlee. 
dy lheeagh, v. if would lick. S 
dy liee, v. to lick or lap with the tongue; 
-agh; -ee; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. S 
er lhee or liee, v. hath, &c. licked, lapped, 
or cleansed with the tongue.  
shlieet, 85. licked or lapped up. 
shlieeder, s. m. one that licks; pl. -yn. 
shleaig, s. f. a small lick, a stinted bit. 
sleig, s. a small bit or morsel. [cf. shleaig?] 
shlig, s. f. a shell, a sh[er]d; Isaiah, xxx. 14: 
…myr shen nagh bee er ny gheddyn ayns y 
vrishey echey wheesh shlig dy ghoaill aile 
veih’n chiollagh, ny dy hroggal ushtey ass yn 
phouyl. …so that there shall not be found in the 
bursting of it a sherd to take fire from the 
hearth, or to take water withal out of the pit; pl. 
-gyn. 
yn tlig, s. the shell. S 
shliggagh, a. shelly. 
shliggee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. 
303 
S 
 
shlingan, s. f. the shoulder, or back part of the 
shoulder; pl. -yn. 
yn clingan, s. the back of the shoulder. S 
dty lingan, s. thy shoulder. S 
e lhingan, s. his shoulder; pl. -yn. S 
shlinganagh 
linganagh, a. d. of the shoulders. S  
lhinganagh, a. d. of the shoulder. S 
shnoag or shnoagerey, s. m. a sneakup; pl. 
-yn. 
shnoagagh, a. sneaky or sneaking. 
shnoagyraght, v. sneaking. 
shoggyl, s. f. rye; Exod. ix. 32: Agh cha row’n 
churnagh ny’n shoggyl naardey, son cha row 
ad foast ass yn oashyr. But the wheat and the 
rye were not smitten: for they were not grown 
up; pl. -yn. 
faiyr-shoggyl, s. f. rye grass. 
shoh, adv. this, here. 
er-shoh, adv. whereupon, on this. 
sholl, s. f. the wax of the ear, the natural 
greasiness or eek of wool; pl. -yn. 
e holl, s. his earwax, or eeking in wool. S 
shollane, s. f. a strainer, a filterer; pl. -yn. 
shooill, v. walk; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
hooyl or hooyll*, did walk, walked; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. S  
huill, v. did walk; Esther, ii. 11: As huill 
Mordecai dy chooilley laa roish cooyrt thie ny 
mraane dy vriaght kys va Esther, as cre’n erree 
harragh urree. And Mordecai walked every day 
before the court of the women’s house, to know 
how Esther did, and what should become of 
her; Acts, iii. [8]: As lheim eh seose, as hass 
eh, as huill eh, as hie eh stiagh ayns y 
chiamble maroo, shooyl as lheimyragh, as cur 
moylley da Jee. And he leaping up stood, and 
walked, and entered with them into the temple, 
walking, and leaping, and praising God; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. S  
shooyll, v. walking. Yn un shooyll (the one 
fate or pass). 
shooillit or shooylt, 85. walked. 
shooyll-ny-dhieyn, v. begging. 
shooilleyder, s. m. a walker, a pedestrian. 
shoushan, s. f. a [c]hive; pl. -yn. 
shu, v. sue, prosecute; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
shual, v. sueing, prosecuting.  
shuit, 85. sued, prosecuted. 
shualtagh, s. m. plaintiff, a complainant; 
pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]. 
shuddyr, s. f. scissors; pl. -yn. 
shughlaig, s. f. sorrel or sourdock. 
shughlaigagh, [a]. abounding in sorrel. 
shugyr, s. m. sugar; pl. -yn. 
shuilg, v. nibble, eat in small morsels; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88. 
shuilgey, v. nibbling, eating by small 
morsels. 
shuilgit, 85. eaten slowly, &c. 
shuilgeyder, [s]. a nibbler; pl. -yn. 
shuit or shooit, s. m. a suit, shift or effort; pl. 
-yn. 
shuitit, 85. shifted, &c. 
shuitelagh, s. m. a shifter, a progger; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. 
shune, shioon, or shuin, s. f. a rush; pl. -yn. 
e hune, s. his rush. See also hioon. S 
e hioon, s. his rush; pl. -yn. S 
shunagh, a. d. rushy, of rushes. 
shutternee, v. neighing. 
dy hutternee, v. to neigh. S 
shuyr, s. f. a sister; pl. -aghyn.  
y çhuyr, s. the sister; Jer. iii. 10: As ny-yeih 
son ooilley shoh, cha vel y chuyr foalsey eck 
Judah er hyndaa hym’s lesh e slane cree, agh 
ayns molteyrys, ta’n Chiarn dy ghra. And yet for 
all this her treacherous sister Judah hath not 
turned unto me with her whole heart, but 
feignedly, saith the Lord. S 
e huyr, s. his sister; pl. -aghyn. S  
shayrraghyn, s. pl. sisters. A corruption of 
shuyrraghyn, probably because it sounds 
better in opposition to braaraghyn.  
dty hayraghyn, s. thy sisters; Ez. xvi. 45: 
T’ou uss inneen dty vayrey, ta dwoaie eck er e 
sheshey, as e cloan, as t’ou uss shuyr dty 
hayraghyn, oc va dwoaie er nyn sheshaghyn, 
as er nyn gloan. Thou art thy mother’s 
daughter, that lotheth her husband and her 
children; and thou art the sister of thy sisters, 
304 
S 
 
which lothed their husbands and their children. 
S  
shayrey, a. d. of a sister or sisters.  
e hayrey, a. d. of his sister; Gen. xxix. 13: 
As haink eh gy-kione, tra cheayll Laban imraa 
jeh Jacob mac e hayrey, dy roie eh ny whail, 
as ghow eh ayns e roihaghyn eh, as phaag eh 
eh, as hug eh lesh eh gys e hie. And it came to 
pass, when Laban heard the tidings of Jacob 
his sister’s son, that he ran to meet him, and 
embraced him, and kissed him, and brought 
him to his house. S 
liass huyr, s. f. a step sister. 
shuyrys 
e huyrys, s. his sisterhood. S 
shyml or shymlee, v. pine or languish; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
hyml* or hymlee, v. did pine or decay; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. S  
shymley, v. pining, languishing. 
dy hymley, v. to pine or waste away. S 
shymlit, 85. pined away. 
shymlee, a. d. 
gorley-shymlee, s. a consumption. 
shymleyder, s. m. one who pines as in a 
consumption. 
shynnagh, s. m. a fox; pl. 71 [change -agh to 
-ee].  
shynnee, a. d. of a fox or foxes. 
laa-shynnee, s. a fox day. 
shynney, v. do or doth like or love. 
cha nhynney, v. like not, do not like. S  
bynney, s. did prefer, or hold in estimation, 
had fondness for, did like; the past time of 
shynney.  
shyrragh, s. m. a kite; pl. 71 [change -agh to 
-ee]. 
shirragh-ny-giark, s. m. the falcon, a 
hawk. 
side, s. f. an arrow, a shaft; pl. -yn. 
syde, s. f. an arrow; Exod. xix. 13: Cha benn 
laue rish nagh bee eh dy jarroo er ny chlaghey, 
ny er ny varroo lesh syde: lhig da ve baagh ny 
peccagh cha jig e vioys lesh.There shall not an 
hand touch it, but he shall surely be stoned, or 
shot through; whether it be beast or man, it 
shall not live. See side. 
y tide, s. the arrow, the shaft. S 
e hide, s. his arrow; pl. -yn. S 
sidey, a. d. of an arrow or shaft. 
sideyr, s. m. an archer; pl. -yn. 
ny hideyr (sic: stress), s. an archer; pl. -yn. 
S  
sideyragh, a. d. of archery. 
sideyrys, s. f. archery. 
e hideyrys, s. his archery. S 
sidoor, s. m. a soldier; pl. -yn. 
e hidoor, s. his soldier; pl. -yn. S  
sidoor marrey, s. m. a marine. 
sidooragh, a. d. of a soldier. 
sidoorys, s. f. soldiery, soldiership. 
e hidoorys, s. his soldiery. S 
sie, a. sad, bad, ill. 
y tie, s. the ill, the bad. S  
dy hie, a. of bad, ill, badly. S  
siey, a. pl. sad, bad, ill. 
siyr, s. m. haste, hurry, expedition. 
e hiyr, s. his haste or hurry. S  
siyrragh, a. hasty, expeditious, in a hurry. 
ro hiyrragh, a. too hasty, &c. S  
siyrree, a. more or most hasty. 
siyrree, v. hasten, make haste, move 
swiftly.  
hiyrree, v. did hasten or hastened. S  
siyrraghey 
dy hiyrraghey, v. to hasten, to hurry. S  
siyrrit 
ro hiyrrit, 85. too hastened or hurried. S  
siyrrid, s. m. hastiness, expeditiousness. 
e hiyrrid, s. his hastiness or hurry. S  
skaal, s. f. a flat dish, a saucer; pl. -yn. 
skaaley, s. f. a flat wooden dish used in 
wort.  
skabbag, s. f. a lock or handful of green flax; 
pl. -yn. 
skah, s. f. a mark in the ear of sheep; pl. 
-ghyn.  
skah, s. f. a strong wind that sheds or shakes 
corn or fruit; pl. -ghyn.  
skah, v. shed, shake; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
scaa, shed. See also skaa and skah. 
skahee, a. d. of shedding or shaking. 
skahit or skaht, v. shook, scattered, shed. 
scaht, 85. shook. See skaht.  
305 
S 
 
neu-skaht, a. unshook, unshaken, unshed. 
skaheyder, s. m. a shedder or shaker. 
scaa[-]lhean, s. m. a broad scatter; pl. -yn. 
skaalhean (sic: stress), s. f. dispersion, 
shed abroad; Jer. xxv. 34: …son ta laghyn 
nyn stroie as nyn scaalhean er jeet mygeayrt; 
as tuittee shiu ayns peeshyn myr saagh craie 
costal. …for the days of your slaughter and of 
your dispersions are accomplished; and ye 
shall fall like a pleasant vessel. See also 
scaalhean. 
scaalheaney, v. scattering; Isa. xli. 16: 
Fasnee oo ad, as hed ad lesh y gheay, as nee 
geay-chassee ad y scaalheaney. Thou shalt 
fan them, and the wind shall carry them away, 
and the whirlwind shall scatter them. 
skaig or skeag, s. f. a haw; pl. -yn. 
drine skeag (the haw thorn), &c. 
skaigagh, a. having hawthorn berries or 
haws. 
skairt, s. f. the caul; Hos. xiii. 8: Ver-ym 
quaaltagh daue myr y vuc-awin ta er choayl e 
quallianyn, as raip-ym skairt y chree oc. I will 
meet them as a bear that is bereaved of her 
whelps, and will rend the caul of their heart; pl. 
-yn.  
skawgh, a. neat, trim, compact. 
skeab, s. f. a besom; pl. -yn. 
skeab, v. sweep; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
skeabey, v. sweeping, brushing. 
skeabit, 85. swept, brushed. 
skeabeyder, s. m. a sweeper; pl. -yn. 
skeaban, s. f. a brush; pl. -yn.  
skeah or skeay, s. spew, vomit. 
skeeah, s. See skeah and skeay. 
skeah or skeay, v. vomit, &c.; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. 
skeayit or skeayt, 85. spewed, vomitted.  
skeayder, s. m. one who spews or vomits. 
skeayagh, a. squeamish; Isa. xxiv. 9: Cha 
jean ad giu feeyn lesh arrane; bee jough lajer 
skeayagh dauesyn ta dy iu eh. They shall not 
drink wine with a song; strong drink shall be 
bitter to them that drink it. 
skaugh, s. f. disgust, nauseousness. 
skeayl, v. spread, scatter, dispel, dispense; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
skeayley, v. spreading, scattering; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn]. 
skeaylt, 85. spread, scattered. 
skeddan, s. m. a herring, herrings; pl. -yn. 
scaddan, s. m. herring. See also skeddan. C 
skee, a. tired, weary, fatigued. 
skeey, a. pl. tired, weary. 
neu-skee, a. untired, unweary. 
skeeys, s. f. tiresomeness, wearisomeness. 
skeeagh, a. tiresome, wearisome. 
skeeal, s. f. story, tale, narrative, tidings; pl. 
-yn. 
 far-skeeal, s. f. a fable; pl. -yn. 
skeealagh, a. having stories. 
 far-skeealagh, a. fabulous. 
skeealee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. 
skeealerey or skeealleyder, s. m. a 
storyteller, a news-monger; Pro. xviii. 8: Ta 
focklyn skeealleyder myr lhottyn, as ta’n ghah 
oc roshtyn eer gys y chree. The words of a 
talebearer are as wounds, and they go down 
into the innermost parts of the belly. 
skeerey, s. f. (from scarrey), a parish; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn]. 
skyll or skylley, s. f. (corrupted from 
skeerey), a parish. 
skeet, s. m. a creeping, sneaking fellow. 
steet, s. Though this is the orthography in 
Jude, i. 4, I have written it skeet, which see. 
[See skeetagh.] 
skeetagh, a. in a sneaking manner. [Jude, i. 
4: Son ta shiartanse dy gheiney dy steetagh er 
hayrtyn stiagh, nyn gour va’n vriwnys shoh roïe 
er ny oardaghey; deiney mee-chrauee, 
chyndaa grayse yn Jee ain gys rouanys, as 
gobbal yn ynrycan Chiarn Jee, as nyn Jiarn 
Yeesey Creest. For there are certain men crept 
in unawares, who were before of old ordained 
to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the 
grace of our God into lasciviousness, and 
denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus 
Christ.] 
skeetee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
skeiee, s. f. the scathe or stilt, of a plough. 
306 
S 
 
skeilley 
skielley, s. m. hurt, harm, scath; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn]. 
lus-skeilley, s. f. loosestrife, or willow-
wort. 
skeiy, s. f. a faggot or bundle of something to 
shut a door or gap; pl. -ghyn. “Skeiy sy 
doarlish.” [A bundle of faggots in a gap.] 
skelf, s. m. a rail; pl. -yn. 
skelim, s. a whim, a freak; pl. -yn. 
skelimagh, a. whimish, freakish. 
skelimee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
skell, v. to vanish, to disappear; Luke, xxiv. 
31: As va ny sooillyn oc er nyn vosley, as hug 
ad enney er; as skell eh ersooyl ass nyn 
shilley. And their eyes were opened, and they 
knew him; and he vanished out of their sight; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
skelloo, s. f. a shelf; pl. -yn.  
skelt, s. a squat; pl. -yn. 
skelt, v. to squat; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83, 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
skeltagh, a. apt to squat, apt to start aside. 
skeltee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
skeog, s. f. a lock of hair or flax, &c., pl. -yn. 
skiog. See skeog. 
kiog, s. f. a lock or ringlet of hair or flax; 
pl. -yn. Whether this word is in its proper 
form or not I cannot tell, but as I find it 
pluralized in Numbers vi. 5: (Ooilley ny 
laghyn t’eh fo kiangley’n vreearrey shoh, cha jig 
razor er e chione: derrey vees ny laghyn 
harrish, ayndoo t’eh dy scarrey eh hene gys y 
Chiarn, bee eh casherick; as nee eh lhiggey da 
kiogyn folt e ching gaase. All the days of the 
vow of his separation there shall no razor come 
upon his head: until the days be fulfilled, in the 
which he separateth himself unto the Lord, he 
shall be holy, and shall let the locks of the hair 
of his head grow), I have inserted it, yet I 
think it ought to be initialled by s, as in Jud. 
xvi. 13: Eisht dooyrt Delilah rish Samson, T’ou 
foast dy m’y volley, as ginsh breagyn dou: insh 
dou cre lesh oddys oo ve kianlt. As dooyrt eh 
r’ee, My nee oo rheynn folt my ching ayns 
shiaght skeogyn, as fee ad dy cheilley, as 
jannoo ad shickyr lesh kibbin ’sy gharmin [hed 
my niart voym]. And Delilah said unto Samson, 
Hitherto thou hast mocked me, and told me 
lies: tell me wherewith thou mightest be bound. 
And he said unto her, If thou weavest the seven 
locks of my head with the web.  
skeoigh, a. spruce, tidy. 
skeoighey, a. id., comp. and sup.  
schoigh, a. snug, trim, warm. 
schoighey, a. id., comp. and sup. 
sker, s. f. a rock in the sea; pl. -yn. 
skerin, s. m. a splice or scarf; pl. 72 [change 
-in to -eeyn] or -yn. 
skerit, 85. spliced, scarfed. 
skew 
lieh-skew, a. slopewise, obliquely. 
skian, s. f. a wing; pl. -yn. 
skianagh, a. winged, having wings; s. m. a 
winged creature, a fowl; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee]. Eccl. x. 20: Ny jean y ree y 
oltooan, eer ayns dty smooinaghtyn, as ny 
loayr dy olk jeh deiney ooasle ayns dty hiamyr 
lhiabbagh: son nee eean jeh’n aer yn coraa y 
chur lesh, as ver yn skianagh briaght er y 
chooish. Curse not the king, no not in thy 
thought; and curse not the rich in thy 
bedchamber: for a bird of the air shall carry the 
voice, and that which hath wings shall tell the 
matter. 
skianit, 85. winged, pinioned. 
skibbylt, a. light of foot, nimble; 2 Sam. ii. 
18: …va Asahel coshee cha skibbylt as feeaïh 
’sy vagher. …and Asahel was as light of foot as 
a wild roe. 
skibbyltey, a. id., comp. and sup. 
skihll, v. shell, strip of the shell or husk; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88. 
skihlley, v. shelling, taking off the shells, 
husks, or hulls. 
skihlt, 85. shelled, hulled. 
neu-skilt, a. unshelled. 
skihlley, s. m. a shelling. 
skihllee, a. d. of shelling. 
skihlleyder, s. m. one who shells, &c.  
skilleig, s. f. a narrow stripe of any thing; pl. 
-yn.  
307 
S 
 
skilleigagh, a. being in narrow stripes. 
skilleigee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58.  
skillin, s. f. a shilling, pl. 72 [change -in to 
-eeyn]. 
skimmee s. m. a crew, a boat or ship’s crew. 
skir or skyrr*, v. slip, slide; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
skyrr, v. slip, slide. See skir. The former 
word is used in Psl. xviii. 36: Nee oo raad 
lhean dy liooar foym dy immeeaght: nagh skyrr 
my chesmadyn. Thou shalt make room enough 
under me for to go: that my footsteps shall not 
slide; and Jer. ii. 19: Nee dty vee-
chraueeaght hene uss y smaghtaghey, as nee 
dty chooyl-skyrraghtyn hene oo y gheyrey: 
Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and 
thy backslidings shall reprove thee; and iii. 12: 
Chyndaa uss reesht, Israel chooyl-
skyrraghtyn, ta’n Chiarn dy ghra. Return, thou 
backsliding Israel, saith the Lord. 
skirrey, v. slipping, sliding. 
skirraghtyn 
er skirraghtyn, v. hath, &c. slipped or 
slidden; Pro. xiv. 14: Bee eshyn ta cooyl-
shirraghtyn [l. skirraghtyn] ayns e chree, 
skee jeh ny raaidyn echey hene: agh bee 
dooinney mie jeant-magh veih hene. The 
backslider in heart shall be filled with his own 
ways: and a good man shall be satisfied from 
himself. 
skirrit, 85. slided, slipped. 
skirreyder, s. m. a slider or slipper. 
skirraghtagh, s. m. one that slides or slips; 
pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
skyrraghtagh, a. apt to slide or slip. 
skyrraghtee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
cooyl-skirraghtagh, s. m. a backslider; pl. 
71 [change -agh to -ee]. 
skirrag, s. f. a splinter; pl. -yn. 
skon, s. m. meat or drink got by intrusion.  
skort, s. f. a chasm; pl. -yn. 
skyn ‘top’ 
bun-ry-skyn, adv. topsy-turvy, upside 
down. 
er-skyn, adv. above; super.  
er-skyn-earroo, a. innumerable.  
er-skyn-insh, a. unutterable, unspeakable.  
er-skyn-towse, a. immeasurable.  
er-e-skyn, adv. p. above him; -s, id. em.  
er-my-skyn, p. p. above me; -s, id. em. 
er nyn skyn, adv. p. above us, you, them.  
er-dty-skyn, adv. p. above thee; -s, id. em. 
skynn, s. f. a knife; pl. -aghyn. skynnyn is 
used for the plural in Pro. x[xx]. 14: Ta 
sheeloghe ayn, ta nyn veeacklyn myr cliwenyn, 
as nyn veeacklyn-keeill myr skynnyn, dy stroie 
ny boghtyn jeh’n thalloo, as ny ymmyrchee veih 
mastey deiney. There is a generation, whose 
teeth are as swords, and their jaw teeth as 
knives, to devour the poor from off the earth, 
and the needy from among men. 
skynn-attey, s. f. a dagger; Jud. iii. 16, 21: 
Agh hug Ehud lesh skynn-attey (dy ghaa foyr), 
cubit er lhiurid; as chiangle eh eh fo e eaddagh 
er e heu yesh. But Ehud made him a dagger 
which had two edges, of a cubit length; and he 
did gird it under his raiment upon his right thigh. 
As hug Ehud magh e laue chiare, as ghow eh 
yn skynn-attey veih e lheayst yesh, as roie eh 
stiagh eh ’sy volg echey. And Ehud put forth his 
left hand, and took the dagger from his right 
thigh, and thrust it into his belly. 
skynn-phenney, s. f. a pen-knife; Jer. 
xxxvi. 23: As haink eh gy-kione, tra va Jehudi 
er lhaih three ny kiare dy ghuilliagyn, dy yiare 
yn ree eh lesh skynn-phenney, as cheau eh 
’syn aile eh va er y chollagh, derrey va ooilley 
yn lioar losht ’syn aile va er y chollagh. And it 
came to pass, that when Jehudi had read three 
or four leaves, he cut it with the penknife, and 
cast it into the fire that was on the hearth, until 
all the roll was consumed in the fire that was on 
the hearth. 
skyoll, s. f. a great deal, a large quantity. 
skyoltagh, a. profuse.  
skyoltys, s. f. profusion.  
skyrtlagh, s. f. a lap full; pl. 72 [change -agh 
to -eeyn].  
slaa, v. daub, besmear, plaster; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88.  
dy laa, v. to daub or besmear; Ez. xiii. 10, 
11, 12: Er-yn-oyr, dy feer, er-yn-oyr dy vel ad 
er chur shaghrynys er my phobble, gra, Shee, 
tra nagh row shee ayn; as hrog fer voalley, as 
cur-my-ner va feallagh elley dy laa harrish eh 
lesh morter gyn-bree. Abbyr roosyn ta dy laa 
308 
S 
 
eh lesh morter dyn-bree, Dy jean eh tuittym: hig 
thooilley hrome-liaghee, as tuittee shiuish, O 
chlaghyn mooarey sniaghtee, as nee geay 
rastagh eh y scoltey. Cur-my-ner, tra ta’n 
voalley er duittym, nagh bee eh er ny ghra 
riuish, Cre’n erree t’er y vorter lesh ta shiu er 
laa eh? Because, even because they have 
seduced my people, saying, Peace; and there 
was no peace; and one built up a wall, and, lo, 
others daubed it with untempered mortar: Say 
unto them which daub it with untempered 
mortar, that it shall fall: there shall be an 
overflowing shower; and ye, O great hailstones, 
shall fall; and a stormy wind shall rend it. Lo, 
when the wall is fallen, shall it not be said unto 
you, Where is the daubing wherewith ye have 
daubed it? -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 
94. S 
slaait or slaiyt, 85. daubed, besmeared, 
plastered.  
slaadaah, v. painting. 
slaader, s. m. a dauber, &c.; pl. -yn. 
slaaik, s. m. This word ought to be used for 
mortar, a composition that would daub. 
sladdan, s. f. a wash staff; pl. -yn. 
yn claddan, s. the wash staff. S  
yn chladdan (sic), s. the wash-staff. S 
slane, a. whole, total, hale. 
yn clane, s. the whole. S 
slaney, a. pl. whole, healed. 
slane jeant magh, a. complete, perfect. 
slane kiarit, adv. wholly resolved. 
slane palçhey, s. abundance; 1 Chro. xxix. 
21: As heb ad ourallyn gys y Chiarn, as 
ourallyn-losht er laa-ny-vairagh, eer thousane 
dow, as thousane rea, as thousane eayn, 
marish nyn ourallyn-feeyney as ourallyn elley 
ayns slane palchey, son ooilley Israel. And 
they sacrificed sacrifices unto the Lord, and 
offered burnt offerings unto the Lord, on the 
morrow after that day, even a thousand 
bullocks, a thousand rams, and a thousand 
lambs, with their drink offerings, and sacrifices 
in abundance for all Israel. 
slane pooar, s. authority; Esther, ix. 29: 
Eisht scrieu Esther yn ven-rein, inneen Abihail, 
as Mordecai yn Ew, lesh slane pooar, dy 
choyrt ayns bree yn screeuyn elley shoh son 
Purim. Then Esther the queen, the daughter of 
Abihail, and Mordecai the Jew, wrote with all 
authority, to confirm this second letter of Purim. 
slane tushtagh, a. perfect knowledge. 
slane-ayd, p. p. farewell with thee; -s, id. 
em. 
slane-lhiat, p. p. fare thee well. 
slane[-]lhieu, p. p fare ye well, or farewell 
with you. 
slaneid, s. m. wholeness, perfection. 
asslaanid, s. m. pravity, not in a perfect 
state. 
slane-luss or slan-luss. See also slaanluss, 
ribwort, called so in Manks on account of 
its quality in assisting nature to heal, when 
applied. 
slaan-luss, s. f. ribwort. 
slane-ynrick, a. perfect; Job, i. 1: Va 
dooinney ayns cheer Uz, va’n ennym echey 
Job; as va’n dooinney cheddin slane-ynrick as 
jeeragh, goaill aggle roish Jee, as shaghney 
olk. There was a man in the land of Uz, whose 
name was Job; and that man was perfect and 
upright, and one that feared God, and 
eschewed evil. 
slane-ynsit, a. perfect; Isa. xlii. 19: Quoi ta 
doal, agh my harvaant? ny bouyr, agh my 
haghter? quoi ta cha doal rishyn ta slane ynsit, 
cha moal ayns soilshey as shirveishagh y 
Chiarn? Who is blind, but my servant? or deaf, 
as my messenger that I sent? who is blind as 
he that is perfect, and blind as the Lord’s 
servant? 
slaan, v. heal; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
slaanagh or slaanaghey, v. healing, getting 
whole. 
slaneaghey, v. healing, making whole; a. 
sanative, healing. 
dy laanaghey, v. to heal, to make whole. S 
slaanee, a. d. of healing. 
laanee, v. [did] heal, cure. 
slaanit, 85. healed, made whole. 
slaaneyder, s. m. a healer; pl. -yn. 
slaynt, s. f. health, saneness, sanity; pl. -yn. 
yn tlaynt, s. the health. S  
yn claynt, s. the health. S 
e laynt, s. his health. S 
corp-as-slaynt, s. m. kind love and best 
respects. 
asslaynt, s. f. out of health, sickness, 
309 
S 
 
disease, illness, disorder; pl. -yn. 
iu[-]laynt, s. m. a toast, something said 
before drinking in company; pl. -yn. 
lhag-laynt, s. m. indisposition. 
slayntoil, a. healthy, healthful, sane, sound. 
slayntoiley, a. id., comp. and sup. 
neu-slayntoil, a. unhealthy. 
slayntoilid, s. m. healthiness. 
slat or slatt, s. f. a rod; the yard of an animal; 
a badge of office. Slat ayns moon (some 
punishment or chastisement provided). 
yn tlat, s. the rod. S  
yn clat, s. the rod, the wand; fer y clat (the 
coroner or lockman). 
e lat, s. his rod, his lath. S 
nyn glat, s. your, &c. rod. S 
slat-eeastee, s. f. a fishing rod. 
slattag, s. f. a small rod; the dim. of slat.  
yn tlattag, s. the small rod. S  
yn clattag, s. the small rod, the dim. of rod 
S 
e lattag, s. his small rod; pl. -yn. S 
slattey, s. m. yarding; a custom in this 
Island, in former times, that the constituted 
authorities could notice any man or woman 
servant and make him or her serve for one 
year at very low wages.  
slattys, s. m. a statute, a decree or precept; pl. 
-syn. 
yn clattys, s. the statute. S 
e lattys, s. his statute; pl. -syn. S 
sleab, s. m. a slave; pl. -yn. 
sleayd, s. f. a trail, sledge or drag. 
sleayd, v. trail, drag; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88; Ez. 
xxix. 4: Agh ver-yms dooanyn ayns dty 
cheeillyn’s, as ver-ym er eeastyn dty awin dy 
lhiantyn gys dty scaailey, as sleayd-ym seose 
oo ass mean dty awinyn, as nee ooilley 
eeastyn dty awin lhiantyn gys dty scaailey. But I 
will put hooks in thy jaws, and I will cause the 
fish of thy rivers to stick unto thy scales, and I 
will bring thee up out of the midst of thy rivers, 
and all the fish of thy rivers shall stick unto thy 
scales.  
sleaydey, v. trailing, dragging. 
sleaydit, 85. trailed, dragged, sledged. 
sleaydeyder, s. m. one who trails; pl. -yn 
sleaydagh, a. trailsome, &c. 
sleaydee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
sleayst, s. f. a shovel; a fan; pl. -yn 
[yn] cleayst, s. f. [the] fan; Matt. iii. 12: 
Ta’n cleayst echey ayns e laue, as nee eh dy 
bollagh e laare-vooie y ghlenney, as gowee eh 
e churnaght stiagh ayns e hie-tashtee: agh 
loshtee eh yn choau lesh aile nagh bee er ny 
vooghey. Whose fan is in his hand, and he will 
throughly purge his floor, and gather his wheat 
into the garner; but he will burn up the chaff 
with unquenchable fire. S 
sleean, s. f. a goad; pl. -yn; Ecclesiasticus, 
xxxviii. 25: Kys yiow eshyn mooarane ynsagh 
ta cummal y cheeaght, as ta boggyssagh jeh’n 
sleean; ta gimman y chesheraght, ta cur-rish 
obbyr vagheragh, as e haggloo mysh ny dew?. 
How can he get wisdom that holdeth the 
plough, and that glorieth in the goad, that 
driveth oxen, and is occupied in their labours, 
and whose talk is of bullocks? 
sleetçh, s. f. slime; pl. -yn. 
sleetçhagh, a. slimy. 
sleetçhee, a. id., comp. and sup  
sleetçhal, v. lurking, sneaking. 
sleggan, s. f. a cleaver; pl. -yn. 
sleggan-sleeu, s. f. foxglove. 
sleick, v. slake, as lime; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
sleickal, v. slaking. 
sleickit, 85. slaked. 
sleih, s. m. 96. people, inhabitants. 
yn cleih, the people, S 
dy leih, s. (from sleih), of people. S 
slibbin, s. m. sloven; pl. -yn. 
slibbinagh, a. slovenly. 
slibbinee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
slieau, s. m. a mountain. 
yn clieau, s. the mountain. 
fo lieau, s. under a mountain; Rev. vi. 14: 
As hie’n aer ass shilley myr duillag lioar ta fillit; 
as va dy chooilley lieau as ellan scughit ass 
nyn undin. And the heaven departed as a scroll 
when it is rolled together; and every mountain 
and island were moved out of their places. S 
sleityn, s. pl. mountains. 
O leityn, s. pl. O mountains! S  
310 
S 
 
sleitagh, a. mountainous, hilly, how hilly. 
sleitee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
sliennoo, s. m. (from slane noo) surname; as 
in the case of Jacob to Israel; Simon to 
Peter, &c.; or from slaa noo, to rub or 
anoint with some unctious matter at time 
surnamed.  
liennoo, s. surname; as, cre dty liennoo[?] 
(what is thy surname[?]).  
sliennoo, v. to surname: -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
dy lhiennoo, [v]. <of> surname, surnamed; 
Mark, iii. 16[-17]: As Simon lhiennoo eh 
Peddyr. As Jamys mac Zebedee, as Ean braar 
Yamys (as lhiennoo eh adsyn Boanerges, ta 
shen dy ghra, Cloan ny taarnee). And Simon he 
surnamed Peter; And James the son of 
Zebedee, and John the brother of James; and 
he surnamed them Boanerges, which is, The 
sons of thunder. 
sliennooit, 85. surnamed. 
sliman, s. m. a loose garment; pl. -yn. 
sling, s. f. a weaver’s slaie [i.e. slay]. 
slissag, s. f. a hame, a slice; pl. -yn. 
yn clissag, s. the hame. 
sloat, s. m. abatement from rain. 
sloatail, v. abating raining. 
slobbagh, a. sloppy, having slop. 
oashyr-slobbagh, s. f. a stocking having no 
sole to the foot, but a lappet covering the 
top of the foot, with a loop to the fore toe 
and a heel strap. 
slock, s. f. the live part in a horn. 
slouree, s. f. a rackentree; what a pot or a 
kettle is suspended by when hung on the 
fire; pl. -yn.  
slug or slugg, v. swallow, gulp; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
my lhugg, v. if swallow; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms, 94. S  
sluggey, v. swallowing, gulping. 
dy lhuggey or luggey, v. to swallow or gulp 
up; Isa. xlix. 19: Son dty ynnydyn-vaghee 
faase as treigit, as cheer dty hraartys, bee ad 
dy jarroo nish ro choon son ny cummaltee, as 
bee adsyn ren uss y lhuggey seose eebrit 
foddey jeh.For thy waste and thy desolate 
places, and the land of thy destruction, shall 
even now be too narrow by reason of the 
inhabitants, and they that swallowed thee up 
shall be far away. S 
sluggee, a. d. of swallowing. 
poyll sluggee, s. f. a whirlpool. 
sluggit, 85. swallowed, gulped. 
sluggeyder, s. m. a swallower; pl. -yn. 
e lhuggeyder, s. his swallower. S 
sluggid 
yn cluggid, s. m. the narrow part of the 
throat, the part where we swallow through 
the glottis. S  
sluggag, s. f. a gulp, a swallow; pl. -yn. 
sluggane, s. f. slake or sloake. 
sluht, s. f. slut; pl. -yn. Prov. “Guilley 
smuggagh dooinney glen, 
Inneen smuggagh sluht dy ven.”  
[A snotty boy, a clean man. A snotty girl, a 
slut of a woman.] 
sluhtagh, a. sluttish. 
sluhtee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. 
sluight, a. some, some little. 
sluight, s. m. issue, posterity, progeny, 
offspring. 
yn cluight, s. the offspring. S 
e luight, s. his offspring, seed, or issue. S 
sliught 
booaliught, s. f. the herb mayflower. 
sluightoil, a. fruitful in children.  
slyst, s. m. border, suburb, environ; pl. -yn. 
yn clyst, s. the region, suburbs, borders. S 
smaght, s. m. correction, chastisement; pl. 
-yn. 
thie smaght, s. m. a house of correction. 
smaght, v. correct, chastise; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88.  
smaghtaghey or smaghtey, v. correcting, 
afflicting, chastising chastening.  
smaghtit, 85. corrected, afflicted. 
neu-smaghtit, a. uncorrected. 
smaghteyder, s. m. a correcter.  
smair, s. f. a berry; pl. 73 [smeir]. 
s<’>meireeagh, a. picking berries. 
smale, s. f. a spark; pl. -yn. 
smalee, a. d. of sparks; Exod. xxxvii. 23: 
311 
S 
 
As ren eh e shiaght lampyn, as e smalyderyn, 
as e phlaityn smalee dy glen airh. And he 
made his seven lamps, and his snuffers, and 
his snuffdishes, of pure gold. 
smaleagh, a. producing sparks. 
smalyder, s. m. a snuffer; pl. -yn. 
smarage, s. f. a live coal of fire that has 
ceased to blaze; pl. -yn. 
smarageagh, a. having live coals that have 
ceased to blaze or flame.  
smaragee, a. id., comp. and sup.  
smarr, v. grease; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
smarrey, s. m. grease; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
smarrey, v. greasing. 
smarrit or smarrt, 85. greased. 
smarreyder, s. m. a greaser; pl. -yn. 
smeggyl, s. f. the chin; pl. -yn. 
smiggyl, s. f. a small diminutive creature. 
smigh, s. f. snuff, the snuff of a candle.  
smighyl, s. f. a small particle of fire, as the 
snuff of a candle. 
smittan, s. f. smut.  
smiddagh or smittagh, a. smutty, spotted 
with black. 
smiddee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. 
smoash, v. smash, crush; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
smoashit, 85. smashed, crushed. 
smock, s. f. a shift; pl. -yn. 
smoghan, s. m. stink, bad smell; Amos, iv. 10: 
…as ta mee er choyrt er smoghan ny campyn 
dy heet seose gys ny stroanyn eu: ny-yeih cha 
vel shiu er hyndaa hym’s, ta’n Chiarn dy ghra. 
…and I have made the stink of your camps to 
come up unto your nostrils: yet have ye not 
returned unto me, saith the Lord. 
smoghanagh, a. stinking, having stink. 
smoghanee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
smoghane, s. m. a suffocating or smouldering 
fume. 
smoghaney, v. smouldering. 
smoghanit, 85. smouldered. 
smood, v. smooth, calender; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
smoodal, v. smoothing, &c. 
smoodit, 85. smoothed. 
smooin, v. think, recollect, consider; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
smooinee, v. This word, through custom, is 
often made use of instead of smooin; as in 
John xvi. 2: Ver ad shiu magh ass ny 
kialteenyn: as ta’n oor cheet, quoi-erbee varrys 
shiu, dy smooinee eh dy bee eh shirveish Jee. 
They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, 
the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will 
think that he doeth God service; and the Prov. 
“Cha smooinee rieau er yn olk nagh ren.” 
[One never thinks of the evil one did not 
do. MWW] 
smooinagh or smooinaghey, v. thinking, 
recollecting, considering. 
smooinit, 85. thought of, recollected. 
neu-smooinit, a. unthought. 
smooinaght, s. m. a thought; pl. -yn.  
aa-smooinaght, s. m. second thought, 
reflection. 
sursmooinaght, s. m. consideration; pl. 
-yn. 
smooineyder, s. m. a thinker; pl. -yn. 
smooir, v. smile, smirk, titter; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88.  
smooirey, or smooirooil, v. smiling, 
tittering; s. m. a kind of stifled or smothered 
laugh.  
smooirit, 85. smiled, laughed.  
smooireyder, s. m. one who laughs a little. 
smooirlagh, s. pl. broken bits, fragments; pl. 
72 [change -agh to -eeyn].  
smooirane, s. all in broken bits or 
fragments. 
smorig, s. f. snuff, huff, pet.  
smorigagh, s. snuffish, pettish.  
smug, s. f. a snot, a spit; pl. -gyn.  
smug-cooag, s. f. cuckoo spittle. 
smuggagh, a. snotty.  
smuggee, a. id., comp. and sup.  
smuggey, v. snotting, spitting. 
smuggit, 85. snotted, spat. 
312 
S 
 
smuir, s. m. marrow; pl. -yn. 
smuiragh, a. marrowy. 
smuiree, s. id., comp. and sup. 
Snaal, s. m. [Snaefell,] a mountain in the 
parish of Maughold, called so from 
sniaghtey (snow) as its summit is often in 
winter covered with snow; it is said to be 
600 yards above the level of the sea, and a 
few feet higher than Baroole.  
snagger, v. gnash; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
snaggeragh or snaggeraght, v. gnashing. 
snaggeyder, s. m. a gnasher; pl. -yn. 
snaid, s. f. a needle; pl. -yn. 
snaidey, a. d. of a needle or needles 
snaie, s. m. thread, a quantity of yarn or 
thread; pl. -nyn. 
snaie-olley, s. m. woollen yarn. 
snaa, a. d. of thread, yarn, or nets. 
snap, s. m. a nap of sleep; pl. -yn.  
snaperaght, v. taking naps of sleep. 
snape[y]der, s. m. one who takes naps. 
snapperal, v. stumbling, stumbleth, &c. Kiap 
snapperal (a stumbling block). 
yn chiap-snapperal, s. the stumbling 
block. K 
snauane, s. m. a slumber (a corruption of 
saveenys), a fibre of gossamer. 
snauanee, s. pl. gossamers, fine fibres on 
the ground on a fine day in unsettled 
weather. 
snaue, v. creep, swim; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
Gamylt is better Manks for swim, but snaue 
is what is used. 
dy naau* or naaue, v. to creep, to swim; 
-agh; -ee; -in, -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. S  
snaueyder, s. m. a creeper.  
sneeu, v. spin, spinning; -agh, 77; -ee, 80 -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
sneeuee, a. d. of spinning. 
sneeuit, 85. spun. 
neu-snieuit, a. unspun. 
sneeuder or sneaueyder, s. m. a spinner; 
pl. -yn.  
sneg, s. f. a latch; pl. -yn. 
sneggagh, a. captious, snappish, how 
captious. 
sneggee, a. id. comp. and sup. 
sneih or snee, s. f. vexation, anything that 
vexes one; pl. -yn. 
sneihagh, a. vexatious, how vexatious. 
sneihee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
sniaghtey, s. m. snow; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
dy niaghtey, s. of snow. S  
sniaghtee, a. d. of snow. 
sniaghtey-garroo, s. m. hail. 
sniem or sniemm*, s. a noose or running 
knot, a bow knot; pl. -yn.  
sniem or sniemm*, v. noose or knot; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 
86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
sniemmey, v. noosing; knitting, as a bone 
after being broke, piecing together. 
sniemmit, 85. noosed, knitted, pieced. 
neu-sniemmit, a. unknit, unnoosed. 
sniemmeyder, s. m. knitter; pl. -yn. 
snieng, s. f. a nit, a louse egg; pl. -yn. 
sniengagh, a. nitty, having nits. 
sniengan, s. f. an ant, a pismire; pl. -yn. 
breckan-sniengan, s. m. a medley colour. 
snien[g]anagh, a. having ants or pismires. 
snig, s. f. a fillip, a sharp stroke or blow. 
snog or snuig, s. m. a nod; pl. -yn.  
snog or snuig, v. nod; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -it, 85; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
snoggal, v. nodding. 
snooid or snoaid, s. f. a length of hair in a 
fishing line or gear; pl. -yn.  
soaill or soill, v. wrap, or bind round; <Isaiah, 
xx[viii]. 20> [See below, soilley]; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
soill, v. See soaill. 
hoail or hoaill, v. did wrap or swathe; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. S  
soailley or soilley, v. wrapping round. 
soilley, v. wrapping, binding up; Isa. xxx. 
26: Myrgeddin, bee soilshey yn eayst myr 
soilshey yn ghrian, as bee soilshey yn ghrian 
shiaght-filley, myr soilshey shiaght laa, ’sy laa 
313 
S 
 
ta’n Chiarn soïlley seose assee e phobble, as 
lheihys guinn nyn lhottyn. Moreover the light of 
the moon shall be as the light of the sun, and 
the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the 
light of seven days, in the day that the Lord 
bindeth up the breach of his people, and 
healeth the stroke of their wound. [Isaiah, 
xx[viii]. 20: Son ta’n lhiabbee ro yiare son 
dooinney dy heeyney eh-hene er; as yn 
eaddagh lhiabbee ro choon da dy hoilley eh-
hene ayn. For the bed is shorter than that a 
man can stretch himself on it: and the covering 
narrower than that he can wrap himself in it.] 
soaillee, a. d. of wrapping round. 
cryss-soaillee 
yn chryss-soillee, s. the swaddling cloth. C 
soaillit, 85. wrapped round. 
soailleyder, s. m. a wrapper; pl. -yn. 
soaillagh, a. sumptous, warmly clad. 
soaillid, s. m. luxury; pl. -yn. 
soailtagh, s. m. an effeminate person; pl. 
71 [change -agh to -ee]; 1 Cor. vi. 9: Nagh 
vel fys eu nagh vow ny mee-chrauee eiraght 
ayns reeriaght Yee? Ny bee-jee mollit: chamoo 
yiow maarderee, ny adsyn ta cur ooashley da 
jallooyn, ny adsyn ta brishey-poosey, ny ny 
soailtee, ny adsyn ta cur rish peccah noi 
dooghys. Know ye not that the unrighteous 
shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not 
deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor 
adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of 
themselves with mankind.  
soalt, s. f. a barn; pl. -yn. 
yn toalt, s. the barn. S 
e hoalt, s. his barn; pl. -yn. S 
nyn doalt, s. your, &c. barn; pl. -yn. S 
soailt, a. d. of a barn or barns. 
toailt, a. d. of a barn. 
soar, s. m. a smell; pl. -yn; (used to good and 
bad). 
soar, v. smell, scent; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
88; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
hoar, v. smelled, did smell; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. S  
soaral, v. smelling, scenting. 
dy hoaral, v. to smell. S 
soarit, 85. smelled. 
soareyder, s. m. a smeller; pl. -yn. 
sock, s. f. a plough share. 
e hock, s. his plough share. S 
sick, s. pl. plough shares; pl. of sock. 
sockeragh, a. easy, tardy, moderate, slow, 
plain; Gen. xxv. 27: As daase ny guillin as va 
Esau ny helgeyr gastey, dooinney magheragh: 
agh va Jacob ny ghooinney sockeragh 
cummal ayns cabbaneyn. And the boys grew: 
and Esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the 
field; and Jacob was a plain man, dwelling in 
tents. 
ro hockeragh, a. too easy or slow. S 
sockeree, a. id., comp. and sup. 
soddag, s. f. a bannock; pl. -yn. 
e hoddag, s. his bannock. S 
soddag-verreen or soddag-verrin, s. [f]. a 
thick clapped cake; a cake generally 
understood as the last of a baking, and left 
longer on the griddle to harden; 1 Kings, 
xvii. 18: Ny bee aggle ort; immee, as Jean 
myr t’ou er ghra: agh jean dooys hoshiaght 
soddag berreen, as cur lhiat hym eh, as eisht 
jean er dty hon hene, as son dty vac. Fear not; 
go and do as thou hast said: but make me 
thereof a little cake first, and bring it unto me, 
and after make for thee and for thy son.  
yn toddag valloo (the dumb cake). 
sogh, s. f. a surge; a sob or groan; pl. -yn. 
e hogh, s. his surge or sob. S 
sogh, v. surge, sob, groan; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88.  
soghal, v. sobbing, surging, groaning; Ez. 
xxx. 24: As neem’s niartaghey roihaghyn ree 
Vabylon, as ver-ym my chliwe ayns y laue 
echeysyn: agh brish-ym roihaghyn Pharaoh, as 
nee eh soghal kiongoyrt rish, myr soghyn 
dooinney ta guint gy-baase. And I will 
strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, and 
put my sword in his hand: but I will break 
Pharaoh’s arms, and he shall groan before him 
with the groanings of a deadly wounded man.  
soghit, 85. surged, sobbed. 
sogheyder, s. m. a sobber, groaner; pl. -yn. 
soi or soie, v. set, sit, plant; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
soie, v. sit, set, plant. 
hoi or hoie, v. did sit, set, sat; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym -yms; -ys, 94. S  
314 
S 
 
dy hoie, v. to sit. S  
soiagh or soiaghey, v. setting, planting. 
soiaghey [jeh], [v.] having respect to; Gen. 
iv. 4: As hug Abel lesh myrgeddin jeh 
toshiaght e hioltane, as y chooid s’riurey. As 
ren y Chiarn soiaghey jeh Abel as e oural. And 
Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his 
flock and of the fat thereof. And the Lord had 
respect unto Abel and to his offering. 
dy hoiagh or hoiaghey, v. to set or plant. S  
er hoiaghey, v. hath, &c. set or planted. S  
bargane soiagh, s. m. a lease. 
dy hoiaghey-magh, v. to set forth, 
represent, describe. S  
ard-soiaghey, s. m. acceptance. 
soiagh-jeh, s. m. acceptance, approbation. 
soiagh-beg, v. despising, slighting. 
soit, 85. set, seated, planted. 
ro hoiet, 85. too set, too seated. S  
hoit, 85. set, planted; 2 Sam. xx. 8: Tra v’ad 
ec y chlagh vooar hoit t’ayns Gibeon, ren 
Amasa leeideil ad. When they were at the great 
stone which is in Gibeon, Amasa went before 
them. S 
soit-jeh, 85. accepted, set by; 1 Sam. xviii. 
30: …as haink eh gy-kione, erreish daue v’er 
n’gholl magh, dy ren David gymmyrkey eh-
hene ny s’dunnal na ooilley sharvaantyn Saul; 
myr shen dy row’n ennym echey dy mooar soit 
jeh. …and it came to pass, after they went 
forth, that David behaved himself more wisely 
than all the servants of Saul; so that his name 
was much set by.  
neu-hoit, a. unset, unplanted. 
soieder, s. m. a sitter, a setter; pl. -yn. 
soiederagh, a. sedentary. 
soieag, s. f. a seat or sofa, a seat made of 
matted straw; pl. -yn. 
yn toieag, s. the seat or boss. S  
e hoieag, s. his boss, or straw seat. S 
sole y dorrys, s. the threshold of the door; 
Zeph. i. 9: Ayns y laa cheddin neem’s 
kerraghey adsyn ooilley ta lheim harrish sole y 
dorrys, ta lhieeney thie nyn mainshtyr lesh 
meechairys as molteyrys. In the same day also 
will I punish all those that leap on the threshold, 
which fill their masters’ houses with violence 
and deceit.  
soll* or sollee, v. defile, pollute, soil, -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88. 
holl or hollee, v. did defile or sully; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. S  
sollaghey, v. soiling, defiling, polluting.  
dy hollagh, or hollaghey, v. to defile or 
sully. S  
solley 
dy holley, v. to defile or sully. S 
sollit, 55. defiled, soiled, polluted; Isaiah, 
xxviii. 8: Son ta ooilley ny buird sollit lesh 
skeay as broïd, myr shen nagh vel boayl erbee 
glen. For all tables are full of vomit and 
filthiness, so that there is no place clean. 
ro hollit, 85. too defiled or sullied. S  
sollaghey-laue, s. a bribe, something put 
into the hand to pervert the judgment; 
Micah, vii. 3: Dy vod ad dy jeean cur-rish olk, 
lesh nyn ghaa laue: ta’n prince geearree leagh, 
as yn briw shirrey sollaghey-laue. That they 
may do evil with both hands earnestly, the 
prince asketh, and the judge asketh for a 
reward.  
solleyder, s. m. a defiler, polluter. 
sollaghyn, s. f. croudy, a kind of pottage 
made of oatmeal and the water or broth 
wherein flesh meat had been boiled, and the 
fat of the broth poured thereon.  
dty hollaghyn, s. thy croudy; pl. -yn. S 
sollys, a. light, bright, shiny. 
ro hollys, a. too light or bright. S  
sollysey, a. id., comp. and sup. 
sollyssid, s. m. brightness, lustre. 
dty hollyssid, s. thy light or brightness. S  
soilsh or soilshee, v. enlighten, declare, 
illume; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
hoilsh or hoilshee, v. did enlighten, 
declare, publish, proclaim, divulge or 
elucidate; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 
94. S  
soilshagh or soilshaghey, v. enlightening, 
declaring, publishing, exhibiting, showing, 
setting forth, revealing.  
dy hoilshagh or hoilshaghey. v. to 
enlighten, declare, &c. S  
soilshit, 85. enlightened, exhibited, shown. 
ro hoilshit, too shown or exhibited, too 
315 
S 
 
declared or published. S  
neu-hoilshit, a. unenlightened; undeclared.  
soilshey, s. m. light, illumination; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn]. 
y toilshey, s. the light. S 
dy hoilshey, s. of light; pl. 67. S  
nyn doilshey, s. your, &c. light, sight. S 
soilshee 
hoilshee, a. d. of light or enlightening<s>. 
S  
soilsheyder, s. m. an enlightener, &c.; pl. 
-yn. 
soilshean (sic: stress), v. shining, shineth, 
shines.  
dy hoilshean, v. to shine or give light.  
soilsheanagh, a. shiny, bright, splendid, 
radiant, glittering; Hab. iii. 11: Hass y 
ghrian, as yn eayst ayns nyn ynnyd: ec soilshey 
dty hideyn ren ad getlagh as ec sollyssid dty 
shleiy soilsheanagh. The sun and moon stood 
still in their habitation: at the light of thine 
arrows they went, and at the shining of thy 
glittering spear; how shiny. 
ro hoilsheanagh, a. too enlightening, &c. S  
soilsheanee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
son, pre. for, because of, in search of. 
son shen as ooilley, conj. notwithstanding, 
for that and all. 
son wheesh, conj. forasmuch, whereas; Isa. 
xxix. 13: Son wheesh as dy vel n pobble 
shoh tayrn er-gerrey dooys lesh nyn meeal, as 
dy my ooashlaghey lesh nyn meillyn, agh ta’n 
cree oc er ny scughey foddey voym… 
Forasmuch as this people draw near me with 
their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, 
but have removed their heart far from me…. 
er-e-hon, p. p. for him, for it. Prov. “Dy 
chooilley ghooinney er e hon hene, as Jee 
son ooilley.” [Every man for himself and 
God for all.] 
er e<h> hon, pre. for him or it. S 
er-e-son, p. p. for her. 
sondagh, a. sordid, avaricious, greedy of 
gain, selfish. 
ro hondagh, a. too avaricious. S  
sondee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
sondid, s. m. sordidness, churlishness. 
e hondid, s. his avariciousness. S 
sonderey, s. m. a greedy or selfish person; 
pl. 68 [change -ey to -eeyn]. Prov. “Ta’n 
breagerey molley yn sonderey.” [The liar 
deceives the greedy person.] 
sonnaase, s. f. arrogance, ambition. 
e honnaase, s. his arrogance, ambition. S  
sonnaasagh, a. arrogant, haughty, self-
conceited. 
ro honnaasagh, a. too arrogant, too 
ambitious. S  
sonnaasee, a. more arrogant, most 
arrogant, the comp. and sup. of 
sonnaasagh. 
sonnys, s. f. satiety, abundance, plenitude, 
luck. 
e honnys, s. his satiety or abundance. S 
faiyr-sonnys, s. f. a kind of soft, whitish 
grass that grows in rich land. 
sonney, a. d. of satiety or plenty. 
arkan-sonney, s. a hedge hog, or a 
fabulous creature ominous of plenty; a fat 
little pig. 
sonnyssagh, a. abundant, copious, 
abounding in plenty; Jer. li. 13: O uss ta 
cummal er ymmodee ushtaghyn, sonnyssagh 
ayns berchys, ta dty yerrey er jeet, as towse dty 
haynt. O thou that dwellest upon many waters, 
abundant in treasures, thine end is come, and 
the measure of thy covetousness. 
sonnyssee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
soo, s. m. juice, essence, substance; pl. -ghyn. 
e hoo, s. his juice or substance. S 
soo, v. soak, suck up; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
88; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
hoo, v. did soak or suck up; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. S  
sooit, 85. soaked, soaked up. 
sooid, s. m. juiciness. 
sooder, s. m. a soaker, sipper, tippler; pl. 
-yn.  
e hooder, s. his soaker. S 
soo-oil, a. juicy, having juice, comp. and 
sup. 
neu-soo-oil or neu-hoo-oil, a. unjuicy. 
sooslagh, s. m. a composition of liquid 
wherein there is some substance. 
soodraght, s. m. the recussion of a wave on 
the shore; pl. -yn. 
316 
S 
 
sooee, s. f. soot; pl -yn. 
dy hooee, s. of soot. 
sooeeagh, a. sooty. 
sooeey, a. pl. soot[y] [for *sooeeee].  
soogh, a. plenary, substantial, solvent, 
plentiful. 
sooghid, s. m. substance, plenteousness, 
plenariness, substantialness. 
sooill, s. f. an eye; pl. -yn. 
y tooill, s. the eye. S 
e hooill, s. his eye; pl. -yn. S 
sooill ny geayee, s. f. the wind’s eye, the 
point the wind blows from; Acts, xxvii. 15: 
As tra va’n lhong er ny imman noon as noal, as 
nagh row ee son jannoo raad noi sooill ny 
geayee, lhig shin jee tuittym lesh. And when 
the ship was caught, and could not bear up into 
the wind, we let her drive. 
clagh-y-tooill, s. the apple of the eye. 
lus feie y tooill, s. f. wild clary. 
lus y tooill, s. f. clary or clear eye, eye 
bright. 
meekey-sooill, s. the twinkling of an eye. 
sooilley, a. d. of the eye or eyes. 
feanish-sooilley, s. an eye witness. 
shilley-sooilley, s. [m.] eye-sight. 
sooillagh, a. having eyes. 
lieh-hooillagh, a. monocular, one eyed. 
soor, a. sour, leavened. Hebrew seor; Welsh 
sur.  
ro hoor, a. too sour. S  
soorey, a. pl. sour, leavened. 
soor or sooree, v. sour, leaven; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
sooragh or sooraghey, v. souring, 
leavening.  
soorit, 85. soured, leavened. 
soorid, s. m. sourness, leaven. 
e hoorrid, s. his leaven or sourness. S 
sooree, s. f. courtship. Prov. “Sooree ghiare, 
yn tooree share.” [Short courting the best 
courting.] 
yn tooree, s. the courtship. S  
dooinney-sooree, s. m. a wooer, a courter. 
sooree, v. wooing, courting. 
dy hooree, v. to court, to woo. S 
soost, s. f. a flail; pl. -yn. 
yn toost, s. the flail. S 
e hoost, s. his flail; pl. -yn. S 
lieh-hoost, s. m. threshing with one flail. 
sooisht, a. d. of a flail. 
sooishtey, a. d. of flails. 
sooyl 
er-sooyl, in. away; pt. gone.  
er-sooyl-jee, adv. p. away with you or ye.  
er-sooyl-lhiat, adv. p. away with thee. 
cur-er-sooyl, v. averting, turning off. 
sorçh, s. m. sort, kind, a species; pl. -yn. 
y torçh, s. the sort. S  
e horçh, his sort; pl. -yn. S  
nyn dorçh, s. your, &c. sort, kind, &c. S 
soarçh, s. See sorçh. 
sorçh, v. assort, sort; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
sorçhit, 85. assorted, sorted. 
ro horçhit, 85. too sorted. S  
sorçheyder. s. m. an assorter; pl. -yn. 
sorn or surn, s. f. the fire-place in a kiln. 
surn, s. f. a fire-place in a kiln, or under an 
oven; pl. -yn. 
yn thurn, s. the fire-place of a kiln. S 
sornaig, s. f. a sewer or covered drain. 
Sostyn, s. England. 
Ree Hostyn, s. the king of England. S 
Sostnagh or Sostynagh, a. English, 
British, or Saxon; s. m. an Englishman, a 
Briton. 
ben Hostnagh, s. an English woman. S 
Sostnee, s. pl. English people. 
dy Hostnee, s. of English people. S 
sou, s. 
sou-aigney, (sie or seiy-aigney), s. f. 
bitterness; 1 Sam. xviii. 8: As va Saul feer 
chorree, as hug y raa shoh sou er e aigney… 
And Saul was very wroth, and the saying 
displeased him…; grief of mind, sorrow of 
spirit; Lam. iii. 65: Ver oo daue sou-aigney, 
hig dty vollaght orroo. Give them sorrow of 
heart, thy curse unto them.  
sou-aignagh, a. in a state of bitterness of 
mind or spirit.  
sou-aignee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
souid, s. m. an old worn out horse. 
317 
S 
 
souir or sour, as spelled in Numbers xi. 18: 
…ta shiu er cheayney ayns clashtyn y Chiarn, 
gra, Quoi ver feill dooin dy ee? son va shin dy 
sour ayns Egypt… ye have wept in the ears of 
the Lord, saying, Who shall give us flesh to 
eat? for it was well with us in Egypt…; or as in 
Job xxxi. 20, souyr: Mannagh vel e veeghyn 
er my vannaghey, as mannagh row eh jeant 
souyr lesh loamraghyn my chirree. If his loins 
have not blessed me, and if he were not 
warmed with the fleece of my sheep; a. warm, 
snug, comfortable, not in want as respects 
circumstances.  
ro houir, a. too snug or comfortable. S  
souirid, s. m. solace, warmth, snugness. 
e houirid, s. his snugness, &c. S 
sourey, s. m. summer. Perhaps from souir 
(warm). 
sy tourey, s. in the summer. S 
dy hourey, s. of summer. S  
souree, a. d. of summer. 
y touree, a. d. of summer. S  
laa houree, a. d. of a summer’s day. S  
thie souree, s. [m.] a summer house. 
sourinagh 
eeym hourinagh, a. summer butter. S 
sows, s. f. a sudden blow or slap; pl. -yn. 
soyl or soylee, v. compare, typify; -agh, 77; 
-ee, -80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88. 
soylee, v. will, &c. compare. This is shown 
above, but this word has the pronominal 
coalesced with it in some places in 
Scripture, as, soylee-ym, Mat. vii. 24: Quoi-
erbee er-y-fa shen ta clashtyn ad shoh my 
ghoan’s, as jannoo ymmyd mie jeu soylee-ym 
eh gys dooinney creeney hrog e hie er creg. 
Therefore whosoever heareth these sayings of 
mine, and doeth them, I will liken him unto a 
wise man, which built his house upon a rock.  
sol* or solee, v. compare; -agh, 77; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
hoyl or hoylee, v. did compare, typify or 
liken; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. S  
hiollee, v. like to have happened. Prov. 
“Haghyr eh ny share na hiollee eh.” [It 
happened better than it might have been.] 
hoyllee, See hiollee. 
solley ta, adv. so is, or it is. 
solley va, adv. so was, or so it was. 
holley-va, adv. so was or were. S 
soylaghey, v. comparing, typifying, 
matching.  
solaghey, v. comparing, compareth, &c. 
dy hoylagh, v. to compare typify, or liken. 
S  
er ny hoylaghey, v. to be compared, or 
being compared, typified or likened; Mat. 
xiii. 24: Ta reeriaght niau er ny hoylaghey gys 
dooinney chuirr rass mie ayns e vagher. The 
kingdom of heaven is likened unto a man which 
sowed good seed in his field. S  
soylit, 85. compared, matched with. 
solit, 85. compared. 
soylaghey, s. a comparison; pl. 69 [change 
-ey to -yn]; Jud. viii. 2 and 3: As dooyrt eh 
roo, Cre ta mish nish er n’yannoo ayns 
soylaghey jeuish? Nagh vel jeelym fouyr-
feeyney Ephraim ny share na slane fouyr-
feeyney Abiezer? Ta Jee er livrey gys nyn 
laueyn princeyn Vidian, Oreb as Zeeb: as cre 
va mish abyl dy yannoo ayns soylaghey 
jeuish? Eisht va’n chorree oc er ny veiyghey, 
tra dooyrt eh shoh. And he said unto them, 
What have I done now in comparison of you? Is 
not the gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim 
better than the vintage of Abiezer? God hath 
delivered into your hands the princes of Midian, 
Oreb and Zeeb: and what was I able to do in 
comparison of you? Then their anger was 
abated toward him, when he had said that. 
mac-soyley, s. m. an instance, a metaphor 
to illustrate by. 
soylley, s. m. enjoyment, fruition, possession. 
e hoylley, his enjoyment or fruition. S 
spaag, s. f. a spattle, the foot of a fowl, the 
foot in contempt; pl. -yn. 
spaagagh, a. splay-footed, 
spaagee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
spaagit, a. having spattles. 
Spaainey, s. f. Spain 
Spaainagh, a. Spanish. 
spaal, s. f. a shuttle; pl. -yn. 
spaal fidderagh (a weaver’s shuttle, or the 
shuttle of a weaver). 
spaar, v. spare, save, do without; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
318 
S 
 
-ys, 88. 
spaarail, v. sparing, saving. 
spaarit, 85. spared, afforded, saved. 
spaarailagh, a. frugal, sparing. 
spaarailee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
spaarailys, s. f. frugality, savingness. 
spaareyder, s. m. a sparer; pl. -yn. 
spaee, s. f. a swathe of grass from the scythe. 
spagey, s. m. a scrip; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
spain, s. m. (spein), a spoon; pl. -yn. 
spake, s. f. a spoke; pl. 69 [change -e to -yn]; 
1 Kings, vii. 33: As va obbyr ny queeylyn 
casley rish obbyr queeyl fainagh; va ny essylyn 
oc, as ny rhollanyn oc, as ny croughyn oc, as 
ny spakyn oc ooilley roit. And the work of the 
wheels was like the work of a chariot wheel: 
their axletrees, and their naves, and their 
felloes, and their spokes, were all molten. 
sparroo, s m. a sparrow; pl. sperriu. 
sperriu, s. pl. sparrows; Luke, xii. 6: Nagh 
vel queig sperriu er nyn greck son daa farling, 
as cha vel unnane oc jarroodit kiongoyrt rish 
Jee? Are not five sparrows sold for two 
farthings, and not one of them is forgotten 
before God? 
spattan, s. light lodged corn; pl. -yn. 
speckleyryn, s. pl. spectacles. 
speeik, v. pry, peep, spy; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
speeikearragh or speeikey, v. prying, 
peeping, descrying. 
speeikear, s. m. a pryer, peeper, spy; pl. 
-yn. 
speein, v. peel, strip off the rind, skin, husk, 
or bark; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
speeiney, v. peeling, taking off the rind, 
&c. 
speeinit or speeint, 85. peeled. 
neu-speeint, unpeeled. 
speeineyder, s. m. a peeler; pl. -yn.  
speeineig, s. f. the rind or peeling; pl. -yn. 
The pl. is often used for splinters; as, Te 
brisht ayns speeineigyn. [It is broken into 
splinters.] 
spynneig, s. See speeineig. 
speeineigagh, a. having peelings, how full 
of peel or rind. 
speeineigee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
speek, s. f. a peak, a spire; pl. -yn. 
speegeen or speekeen, s. f. a small peak or 
spire.  
speeikeenagh, a. spiry. 
speeikeenee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
speiy, s. f. a hack, mattock, or hoe; pl. -ghyn. 
speiy, v. hack, hoe; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
speiyt, 85. hacked. 
neu-sp<r>eiyt, a. unhacked. 
speiyder, s. m. a hacker; pl. -yn. 
spelt, s. f. a wattle or hurdle; pl. -yn. 
speyr, s. the sky. 
spinçh, s. f. a scullion; pl. -yn. 
spinçhyrag[h]t, v. scullioning, doing the 
work of a scullion. 
spinney, s. m. elasticity; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
spinnycan, s. f. the disease in fowls, called 
the pip; pl. -yn. 
Spitlhin, s. m. supposed to have been the 
name of a saint, for which there are two 
days in the year, laa’l Spitlhin souree (18th 
May), laa’l Spitlhin geuree (18th 
November).  
splughan, s. f. a pouch; pl. -yn. 
spoar, s. m. space; pl. -aghyn. 
spoht, s. m. a spot; pl. -yn or spuit. 
spuitt, s. pl. spots; the pl. of spoht. 
spohttagh, a. spotty, full of spots. 
spohttit, a. spotted, how spotted. 
spoiy, v. geld, splay, castrate; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
spoiyt, 85. gelded, splayed.  
fer spoiyt, s. m. an eunuch, one deprived of 
his genitals; pl. fir. 
spoiyder, s. m. a gelder, a splayer. 
spollag, s. f. a chip; pl. -yn. 
spollagagh, a. chippy, having chips. 
spollagee, a. id. comp. and sup. 
sponk, s. m. tinder, burnt cloth to catch fire 
from the spark of flint and steel. 
319 
S 
 
sponk, v. dry or parch up; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
sponkey, v. drying up with drought. 
sponkit, 85. dried up with drought. 
sponnag, s. f. a span, a trick, or error; as the 
Prov. “Ta’n chied sponnag lowit.” [The 
first trick is allowed.] 
spooil or spooill, v. spoil, rob, plunder; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
spooillit or spooilt, 85. spoiled, plundered. 
spooilley, s. m. spoil, prey, plunder; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn]. 
spooillee, a. d. 
lhong-spooillee, s. f. a pirate [sc. ship]. 
spooilleyder, s. m. a spoiler, a robber; pl. 
-yn. 
spooyt, [s]. spout; pl. -yn. 
spooyt, v. spout; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
spooytey, v. spouting, squirting. 
spooyteragh, v. spurting, squatting. 
spooy[t]it, 85. spouted, squirted, sputted. 
spooyteraght, s. m. spurtable drink, only fit 
to be spurted out. 
spooyteyrey, s. m. a squirter, a sputterer. 
spooytlagh, s. m. something poured 
through a spout. 
sporran, s. a purse; pl. -yn. 
sporran-y-vochil, s. f. shepherd’s purse, 
mithridate.  
spotçh, s. a joke, a jest; pl. -yn. 
spotçh, v. joke, jest; -agh, 77; -ee, 80 -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
spotçhal or spotçheraght, v. joking, 
jesting. 
spotçhit, 85. joked, jested. 
spotçheyder, s. m. a joker, jester. 
spotçhagh, a. jocose, jocular. 
sprang- 
sprangagh, a. out of rule, not regular. 
sprangan, s. something that causes 
unevenness. 
spranglane, s. something made up 
irregularly. 
spreih, s. m. a sprinkle, a splash. 
spreighyn, s. pl. sprinkles, splashes. 
croan[-]spreie, s. m. a bowsprit. 
spreih, v. sprinkle, splash; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
spreiht, 85. sprinkled, splashed. 
neu-spreit, a. unsprinkled. 
spreihder, s. m. a sprinkler; pl. -yn. 
spret, s. m. a start, struggle, shove;  
spret, [v.] -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
spretal, v. starting, struggling, &c. 
spretit, 85. started, &c. 
spreteyder, s. m. one that starts, &c. 
sproag or sproaig, s. f. something saved 
sparingly; pl. -yn.  
sproghan, s. the crop of a fowl; pl. -yn. 
sproght, s. f. vexation, spleen wrought up to 
frenzy. 
sproghtit, 85. vexed, vexed so above 
measure as to be frantic. 
spulg, s. f. a peck or pinch of the bone. 
spulg, v. peck, pick, &c.; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ym, 86; -ys, 88. 
spolg. See spulg. 
spulgey, v. pecking or pinching the flesh 
off the bone. 
spulgit, 85. pecked, &c. 
spulgeyder, s. m. a pecker, &c. 
spulgaig, s. f. a sharp or smart pinch, or nip 
off the bone; pl. -yn. 
spyr, s. a collar beam; pl. -yn. 
spyrryd, s. m. spirit; pl. -yn. 
Spyrryd-Noo, s. m. Holy Ghost. 
spyrrydoil, a. spiritual, immaterial, comp. 
and sup.  
spyrrydys, s. f. spirituality. 
spyttog, s. f. spigot; pl. -yn. 
staa, s. m. three men making hedges together, 
two of them cutting the sod and one lifting. 
This word perhaps is derived from 
staayney, to oppose or stand firm against in 
wrestling or at this work; these men called 
a staa formerly made fold hedges; pl. -yn.  
staabyl, s. m. stable; pl. 76 [i.e. staabil].  
staayn, v. oppose, stand firm against; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88. 
staayney, v. strenuously opposing, 
320 
S 
 
opposition vehemently pushing against, or 
standing firm against; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]; Prov. xxi. 29: Ta’n drogh-
ghooinney staayney e eddin: agh son y 
dooinney onneragh, t’eh goll jeeragh er y raad. 
A wicked man hardeneth his face: but as for the 
upright, he directeth his way. 
staaynit, 85. standing statue, like in 
opposition to some force. 
staaynt, 85. set or stuck up against, 
confronting, set in opposition, stiffened up. 
staayneyder, s. m. a strenuous opponent.  
staghyl, s. m. an awkward person; pl. -yn. 
staghylagh, a. awkward, awkwardly. 
staghylee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
staghylys, s. f. awkwardness. 
staik, s. f. a stake; pl. -yn.  
staik, v. stake, &c.; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
staikey, v. staking. 
staikit, 85. staked, anchored.  
staikeyder, s. m. a staker; pl. -yn. 
staik, s. f. a stitch in the body; pl. -yn.  
stainney, s. m. tin; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn].  
stainnagh, a. d. of tin. 
stalk, s. m. a stalk or stem. 
sthilk, s. pl. stalks, stems. 
stamack, s. f. stomach; pl. -yn.  
stamp, v. tread, trample; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
stampey, v. treading, trampling. 
stampit, 85. trod, trodden, trampled. 
neu-stampit, a. untrodden. 
stampeyder, s. m. a treader; pl. -yn. 
stang, s. f. a wooden horse, a stock. 
stangit, 85. set on the wooden horse. 
stannair, s. m. a hawk; pl. -yn. 
stappan, s. m. a stump; a small one, as that of 
corn after being cut; pl. -yn. 
stabban, s. m. a small stump; pl. -yn. 
stappanagh, a. how stumpy. 
stappanee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. 
stark, a. stiff, inflexible; stiffen. 
starkey, a. pl. stiff, &c., and the comp. and 
sup. of stark. 
styrk, v. stiffen or lay stiff; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. See stark.  
starkagh or starkaghey, v. stiffening, 
getting stiff. 
styr[k]it, 85. stiffened.  
styrkeyder, s. m. a stiffener; pl. -yn.  
stayd, s. m. state, case, pomp; pl. -yn. 
stayd-noa, s. m. regeneration; Mat. xix. 28: 
’Sy stayd noa, tra nee Mac y dooinney soie er 
stoyl-reeoil e ghloyr, dy jean shiuish myrgeddin 
t’er n’eiyrt orrym’s soie er daa stoyl-reeoil yeig, 
briwnys daa heeloghe yeig Israel. Ye which 
have followed me, in the regeneration, when 
the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his 
glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, 
judging the twelve tribes of Israel. 
lhag-stayd, a. impotent; Jud. vi. 6: As va 
Israel er ny injillaghey gys lhag stayd kyndagh 
rish ny Midianiteyn. And Israel was greatly 
impoverished because of the Midianites. 
staydoil or staydoilagh, a. stately, 
pompous; s. m. a pompous person; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. 
staydoillys, s. f. pompousness, pomposity. 
steab, s. f. a dart; pl. -yn. 
Steaon, s. m. Stephen. 
steat or steait, s. f. estate, or State of 
America; pl. -yn. 
state-hallooin, s. m. (sic) a farm; Mat. xxii. 
5: Agh hoie adsyn beg jeh as hie ad rhymboo, 
fer gys e state-hallooin, as fer elley gys e 
varchantys. But they made light of it, and went 
their ways, one to his farm, another to his 
merchandise. 
steillin or steillyn, s. m. steel. 
sterr[y]m, s. m. storm; pl. -yn. 
sterrymagh, a. stormy, how stormy. 
sterrymee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
sterrymid, s. m. storminess. 
sterrymit, 85. stormed. 
sthangan, s. f. a small debt; pl. -yn. 
sthanganagh, having small debts. 
sthanganee, a. id.[, comp.] and sup.  
sthap or sthapp*, s. f. a stop or pause; pl. 
-yn. 
sthap or sthapp*, v. stop, pause; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
321 
S 
 
-ys, 88.  
sthappal, v. stopping. 
sthappit, 85. stopped. 
sthappal, s. m. a stoppage; pl. -yn. 
sthappeyder, s. m. a stopper; pl. -yn. 
sthartey, s. m. a job or spell of work; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn]. 
stheg, s. f. a steak or slice of meat; pl. -yn. 
sthock, s. m. stock, fund, race; pl. -yn. 
sthockan, s. f. the body of a plant, a small 
stock.  
sthol or sthole, v. sprout or branch forth, 
ramify or grow in many stalks from the one 
root; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
stholey, v. sprouting, spritting, shooting 
from the one root, growing prolific. 
stholit, 85. sprouted, ramified.  
stholl, s. m. a stall, a station; pl. -yn. 
stholl, v. id, -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
sthollal, v. stationing, stalling. 
sthollit, 85. stationed, stalled. 
stholleyder, s. m. one that stations. 
sthook, s. f. a pile or shock of sheaves, made 
generally of twelve. 
sthook, v. make into piles or stooks. 
sthookey, v. making into piles, shocks, 
stooks. 
sthookit, 85. made in stooks or shocks. 
sthookeyder, s. m. one who makes stooks. 
sthowyr, s. m. a staff or pole. 
sthewir, s. pl. staves, poles; pl. of sthowyr. 
sthowran, s. m. a statue; a person in 
contempt, standing as a pole or statue; pl. 
-yn. 
sthurneish, s. f. stubbornness. 
sthurneishagh, a. stubborn, how stubborn. 
sthurneishee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
stiark, a. few, seldom, how few; Mat. vii. 14: 
Er-yn-oyr dy nee chion ta’n giat, as coon ta’n 
raad ta leeideil gys bea, as s’tiark ad ta dy 
haaghey eh. Because strait is the gate, and 
narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and 
few there be that find it. Prov. “Stiark keayrt 
ta dooinney siyragh <an> [gyn] seaghyn.” 
[A hasty man is seldom without trouble.] 
stiur* or stiure, v. steer or guide a vessel on a 
passage by the helm or rudder; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
stiurey, v. steering. 
stiurit, 85. steered. 
stiurey, s. m. a rudder; pl. 67 [change -ey 
to -aghyn]. 
stiuree, a. d. of a rudder or rudders. 
stiureyder, s. m. skipper, steerer, or 
helmsman. 
stiurt, s. m. a steward; pl. -yn. 
stiurtey, a. d. of a steward or stewards. 
stiurtagh, a. stewardlike. 
stiurtys, s. f. stewardship. 
stoamagh or stoamey, a. stately, ornamental, 
proportionable in the members. 
neu-stoamey, a. unstately. 
stoamid, s. m. stateliness, grandeur. 
stooamid, s. m. this word is in 1 Cor. xi. 
15, for glory: Agh my ta folt liauyr er ben, te 
stooamid j’ee: son ta’n folt eck er ny choyrt j’ee 
son coodagh. But if a woman have long hair, it 
is a glory to her: for her hair is given her for a 
covering, and in [xii.] 23 <verses> for 
honourable: As ny oltyn shen jeh’n chorp, sloo 
ta shin dy choontey jeu, orroo smoo dy 
stooamid ta shin dy stowal, as ny oltyn 
neuyesh ain er nyn goamrey lesh onnor foddey 
smoo. And those members of the body, which 
we think to be less honourable, upon these we 
bestow more abundant honour; and our 
uncomely parts have more abundant 
comeliness. Stoamid, perhaps, is the word 
meant. 
stoandey, s. m. a standish, a kind of barrel; pl. 
67 [change -ey to -aghyn]. 
stoo, s. m. stuff, substance, element, material; 
pl. -ghyn. 
sthoo, s. See stoo. 
stooalt, a. solid. 
stooaltys, s. f. solidity, 
stoo-thie, s. m. household furniture. 
stott, s. m. a steer, a bullock. 
sthitt, s. pl. steers, bullocks. 
stow, v. bestow; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
stowal, v. bestowing. 
322 
S 
 
stowit or stowt, 85. bestowed. 
stowaltagh, s. m. a bestower; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. 
stoweyder, s. m. one that stows. 
stoyl, s. m. a stool, a seat. 
stuill, s. pl. stools, basis. 
stoyl-coshey, s. m. a foot-stool.  
stoyl-reeoil, s. m. a throne or regal seat. 
stoyl-shickyr, s. m. a form.  
stoyr, s. m. store, treasure; pl. -yn. 
stoyr, v. id; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
stoyr-ronney, s. m. a dividend; but it is 
generally understood to be a remainder 
after division not worth dividing. 
thie stoyr, s. m. a store or warehouse. 
stoyral or stoyrey, v. storing, treasuring. 
storail, v. storing, sparing, saving. 
stoyrit, 85. stored, treasured. 
stoyreyder, s. m. a storer; pl. -yn. 
strah, s. f. a plain, level country; a 
champaign; pl. -ghyn; 2 Kings, xiv. 25: Ren 
eh seose ardjyn Israel veih cagliagh Hamath 
gys keayn y strah… He restored the coast of 
Israel from the entering of Hamath unto the sea 
of the plain…. 
straid, s. f. a street; pl. -yn. 
straiddey, a. d. of a street or streets. 
y traid, s. the street. S  
e hraid, s. his street; pl. -yn. S 
nyn draid, s. our, &c. street. S 
stram 
stramlag, s. f. a crankled or awkward 
thing; pl. -yn. 
camstram, a. zigzag, crankled. 
strane, s. m. a file of men, a rank.  
strap, s. m. a line or string; pl. -yn. 
straue, s. f. a straw; pl. -yn. For a quantity of 
straw, see coonlagh.  
streean, s. f. a bridle; pl. -yn or -teeyn. 
y treean, s. the bridle. S 
e hreean, s. his bridle; pl. -yn. S 
streean-volgagh, s. f. a martingale. 
streebagh, s. f. a strumpet, whore, or 
prostitute; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee], or 
rather 72 [change -agh to -eeyn]. 
streebee, a. d. of a strumpet or whore. 
streebeeys, s. f. whoredom, prostitution. 
streeu or streiu, s. f. strife, contention; pl. 
-ghyn. 
streeu or streiu, v. strive, contend; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
streeuit, 85. striven 
streeuder, s. m. a contender, or striver; pl. 
-yn. 
streeuailtagh, a. apt to strive, or be at 
variance; s. m. a contentious person; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. 
streeuailtee, a. more or most apt to strive. 
streeuailtys, s. f. contentiousness, discord.  
streighyr or streiyr, v. sneeze or neese; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
streigh[e]raght or streighernee, v. 
sneezing; 2 Kings, iv. 35: …as ren y lhiannoo 
streghernee shiaght keayrtyn, as doshil y 
lhiannoo e hooillyn. … and the child sneezed 
seven times, and the child opened his eyes.; 
Job xli. 18: Liorish yn streiyraght echey ta 
soilshey brishey magh, as ta e hooillyn my 
ferrooghyn y voghrey. By his neesings a light 
doth shine, and his eyes are like the eyelids of 
the morning. 
streigherit or streiyrit, 85. sneezed.  
streigheyder, s. m. a sneezer; pl. -yn. 
streipe, s. f. a stirrup; pl. -yn.  
streir, s. m. a rope or string; as, muck er 
streir. 
streng, s. m. a string; pl. -yn. 
strep, v. struggle, wrestle, wallow; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
streb, v. struggle, wrest; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
strepey, v. struggling, wallowing; 2 Sam. 
xx. 12: As va Amasa ny lhie strepey ayns e uill 
ayns mean y raad-vooar: And Amasa wallowed 
in blood in the midst of the highway. 
strebin or strepey, v. struggling. See 
strepey.  
strepit, 85. struggled, wallowed. 
strepeyder, s. m. a struggler; pl. -yn. 
323 
S 
 
streyr, s. f. the handle or gear fixed forward 
of a pillion on a horse; pl. -yn. 
strig or strigg*, s. f. a draw or stripe of milk 
from a teat; pl. -yn. 
strig or strigg*, v. stripe or draw from a 
teat; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
striggey, v. milking the strippings. 
striggey, s. drawing milk by stripes or 
strokes. 
strigit, 85. drawn by strokes, milked. 
striggeyder, s. m. a drawer of milk by 
stripes or strokes. 
strig-ghounagh, s. f. a stripper, or a cow 
more than one year on the same milk. 
striggagh, a. slow in giving the milk. 
striggee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
striggle, s. f. a whet-board, the instrument 
with which a mower whets or sharpens his 
scythe. 
striggyl, s. f. a strikeless; pl. -yn. 
strinnoogh, v. snoreing. 
stritlag, s. f. a jade, jilt, trollop, or trull. 
stroie, v. destroy, waste, spend; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
stroieder, s. m. a spender, a waster; pl. -yn. 
stroialtagh, s. m. a destroyer, a spender, a 
prodigal; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]; a. 
wasteful. prodigal. 
ard-stroialtagh, s. m. a great waster; Prov. 
xviii. 9: Eshyn neesht ta liastey ayns e obbyr 
eeh ny vraar da’n ard stroialtagh. He also that 
is slothful in his work is brother to him that is a 
great waster. 
stroin, s. f. a nose; pl. -yn or -teeyn. 
stroaney, a. d. nasal, of the nose. 
stroanyn, s. p. nostrils. 
stroineen, s. f. a nuzzle, a pig’s ring. 
stron, s. m. a snort or snuffle; pl. -yn. 
stron, v. id; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
stronan, s. m. a snuffler. 
stronnagh, a. sounding through the nose or 
nostrils. 
stronnee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
stroo, s. m. the current of a stream; pl. -yn. 
strooan, s. f. a stream; pl. -yn.  
y trooan, s. the stream. S 
strooanagh, a. streamy, full of streams. 
strooanee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
stroos or strooys, it appears so, (perhaps from 
streeu, strife); there has been a strife in me 
how it is, and it is so settled by me that it 
will or shall be as I say; the emphatic of 
stroohene.  
stroohene, p. it appears to me or myself, I 
am persuaded in myself, I imagine or 
suppose, methinks. 
struane, s. f. a triangular bannock. But it 
ought to be written s’troorane.  
struge, or strug*, s. f. a gentle stroke of the 
hand. 
strooig, s. See struge.  
struge, or strug*, v. to draw or stroke the 
hand gently over; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
strugey, v. stroking, drawing the hand 
gently or kindly over. This word is used for 
strike in 2 Kings, v. 11: Hig eh son shickyrys 
magh hym’s, as shassoo, as geamagh er 
ennym y Chiarn e Yee, as strugey e laue 
harrish y boayl doghanagh, as slaanaghey yn 
lourane. He will surely come out to me, and 
stand, and call on the name of the Lord his 
God, and strike his hand over the place, and 
recover the leper.  
strugit, 85. stroked gently.  
strugeyder, s. m. one who strokes.  
strull, s. f. a rinse; pl. -aghyn [pl. of strulley 
?]. 
strull, v. rinse; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
strulley, v. rinsing, streaming, shedding 
out; pl. 67 [change -ey to -aghyn]. 
strullit or strult, 85. rinsed, shed. 
strulleyder, s. m. a rinser; pl. -yn. 
strumpag, s. f. a strumpet, a harlot; Amos, vii. 
17: Bee dty ven ny strumpag ’syn ard-valley, 
as nee dty vec as dty inneenyn tuittym lesh y 
chliwe… Thy wife shall be an harlot in the city, 
and thy sons and thy daughters shall fall by the 
sword; pl. -yn. 
stubbin, s. m. a cat without a tail. 
stubbyl, s. m. stubble. 
324 
S 
 
studdyl, s. m. a timber in a vessel’s side. 
stugg or stuggey, s. m. a stoutling, a part or 
piece of a thing, a thing not so big or stout 
as shall be; pl. 67 [change -ey to -aghyn]. 
sthuggey, s. m. about half size; pl. 67.  
stuitt, a. stout, neat, trim. 
stuittey, a. id., comp. and sup; a. pl. stout, 
neat, trim.  
stundayrt, s. m. a yard; pl. -yn. This might be 
the Manks of standard, and perhaps right, 
as this (the yard) was the only standard 
measure in use; therefore called stundayrt 
(standard).  
styr, v. hiss; used to set a dog on.  
suggane, s. m. a straw rope; pl. -yn.  
dy huggane, s. of straw rope. S  
suggane-corrag, s. m. a straw rope made 
on the thumb. 
bwhid-suggane, s. pl. stones set in the 
walls of a thatched house to tie the ropes to. 
sugganagh, a. d. of straw rope.  
suggain, v. 
huggain, v. did bind with straw rope; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. S  
dy hugganey, v. to bind with straw rope. S  
ro hugganit, 85. too much bound with 
straw rope. S  
sumark, s. f. a primrose; pl. -yn. 
e humark, s. his primrose. S 
sunder, s. m. a sumner or sexton; pl. -yn. 
e hunder, s. his sumner or sexton. S 
sunderagh, a. d. of the sumner, &c. 
sunderys, s. f. sumnership.  
sunt, a. sound, sane, not unhealthy. 
suntid, s. m. soundness. 
sur or surr*, v. suffer, allow; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
sur-jee, v. suffer ye. 
surr, v. See sur. 
hur or hurr*, v. did suffer, suffered; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. S surral, v. 
suffering, enduring. 
dy hurral, v. to suffer pain. S  
surranse, v. 
dy hurranse, v. to undergo, sustain, suffer. 
S  
surrit or surrt, 85. suffered, permitted. 
ro hurt, 85. too much suffered. S 
surranse, s. f. suffering, sufferance, 
[surranssee] a. d. of suffering. 
surranse-foddey, s. f. long-suffering, 
forbearance. 
dty hurranse-foddey, s. thy long suffering. 
S  
surranssagh, a. patient, suffering; Heb. x. 
36: Son te ymmyrchagh diu dy chummal rish 
dy surransagh; lurg diu v’er n’yannoo aigney 
Yee, dy vod shiu yn gialdyn y gheddyn. For ye 
have need of patience, that, after ye have done 
the will of God, ye might receive the promise. 
sufferable, able to suffer; s. m. a sufferer; 
pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee];  
ro hurransagh, a. too sufferable. S  
surranssee, a. more or most able to suffer; 
s. pl. sufferers.  
e hurransee, s. his sufferers. S  
neu-hurransagh, a. insufferable, not to be 
endured. 
sur[-]smooinaght, s. m. consideration; pl. 
-yn.  
sur[-]dremagh, a. trust-worthy, sufficient, 
fit to trust. The simile in this word is taken 
from whether a horse will suffer to be rode 
on the back, sur dreeym agh, sufferable on 
the back.  
ro hurdremagh, a. too trustworthy. S  
surdremee, a. id., comp. and sup. 
surdremid 
e hurdremid or hurdremys, s. his 
trustworthiness. S 
surl or surll*, v. sprawl, toss, tumble; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88. 
hurll, v. did toss or tumble; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. S  
surllaghey, v. 
dy hurllaghey, v. to toss or tumble. S  
surllit, 85. sprawled, tumbled. 
ro hurllit, 85. too tossed or tumbled. S  
surlley, s. m. a sprawl, toss, or tumble; pl. 
67 [change -ey to -aghyn]. 
lheim-surley, s. m. a standing-jump. 
surlleyder, s. m. a sprawler, a tumbler; pl. 
-yn. 
325 
S 
 
Sushin 
Laa’l Sushin, a. Swithin’s day. This day is 
marked in the calender on the 15th of July, 
and is said that if it rains on this day, there 
will not be a day without rain for forty days 
afterwards. 
Sushtal, s. m. Gospel. This word no doubt is 
su from sheeu (being of worth) and shtal, 
from skeeal, (news or tidings, worthy or 
valuable news, or tidings).  
yn Tushtal, s. the gospel. S 
e Hushtal, s. his gospel. S  
sushtalagh, s. m. an evangelist, a gospel 
believer. 
ny hushtallagh, s. an evangelist. S 
sym, s. m. a sum; pl. -yn. 
e hym, s. his sum; pl. -yn. S 
ard-sym, s. m. the principal; pl. -yn. 
symn, v. cite, summon, publish bans of 
matrimony; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
symney, v. citing, summoning. publishing 
matrimonial bans; s. m. a citation; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn]. 
symnit, 85. summoned, cited, &c.  
symneyder, s. m. a summoner, &c. pl. -yn. 
synnin, s. f. a tug or thong, from the middle 
of the small swingletree to the end of the 
large one, in which irons are now used; pl. 
-yn, or synneeyn.  
326 
T 
 
T 
This letter and its changes see remarks 30 and 
59; it takes in derivatives from S. Most words 
in T would sound better, according to the 
Manks pronunciation with h after them, as 
shown in Remark 30. 
taagh, v. frequent, visit often; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
haagh, v. frequented, did frequent; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. T  
taaghey, v. frequenting, resorting often to, 
visiting. I would have written this word 
thaaghey, only it is used in Psl. cxlii. 9 
without an h: Livrey m’annym ass pryssoon, 
dy voddym booise y choyrt da dt’Ennym: as 
shoh my ver oo dou, eisht nee deiney crauee 
taaghey my heshaght. Bring my soul out of 
prison, that I may give thanks unto thy Name: 
which thing if thou wilt grant me, then shall the 
righteous resort unto my company, and in 
John, xviii. 20: Loayr mee dy foshlit rish y 
theihll: dynsee mee kinjagh ayns y cheeill, as 
ayns y chiamble, raad ta ny Hewnyn kinjagh 
taaghey, as dy follit cha vel mee er ghra nhee 
erbee. I spake openly to the world; I ever taught 
in the synagogue, and in the temple, whither 
the Jews always resort; and in secret have I 
said nothing.  
thaaghey, v. See taaghey. 
thaghey, v. frequenting, &c.;&c.; it is 
written thus in the Psalter; Psalms, cxix. 
[23]: Ren princeyn myrgeddin soie as loayrt 
m’oï: agh ta dty harvaant thaghey eh-hene 
ayns dty lattyssyn. Princes also did sit and 
speak against me: but thy servant is occupied 
in thy statutes. See taaghey. 
dy haaghey, v. to frequent. T  
nyn daaghey, v. your, &c. frequenting; Jud. 
v. 6. 
taaghit, 85. frequented, resorted to. 
s’taaghit, a. how frequented. T 
ro haaghit, 85. too frequented. T 
neu-haaghit, a. unfrequented. 
taagheyder, s. m. one that frequents a 
place. 
taaghda or taagher, s. m. a causeway; pl. 
-yn. 
thaghee, s. m. a causeway; pl. -yn. 
taah or taa, s. m. a weld, a solder. 
taah or taa, v. weld, solder, mix<ed>; Dan. 
ii. 43: As son wheesh as dy vaik oo yiarn kione 
y chray hallooin, nee ad seiy ad hene fud 
sluight deiney, agh cha jean ad lhiantyn dy 
cheilley, eer myr nagh vel yiarn taah rish cray 
[? l. taaht]. And whereas thou sawest iron 
mixed with miry clay, they shall mingle 
themselves with the seed of men: but they shall 
not cleave one to another, even as iron is not 
mixed with clay; -agh, 77; -ee, -80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
thaa, v. weld, solder; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -ys, 88; welding, 
soldering 
dy haah, v. to weld, &c.; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms, 94. T 
taahit or taaht, 85. welded, soldered. 
s’taait, a. how welded or soldered. T 
taahder, a. m. a welder; pl. -yn. 
taal, v. flow as milk from the udder to the teat 
when milked or sucked; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-ys, 88. 
haal, v. flowed, or did flow, as milk to the 
udder; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. T  
taaley, v. flowing of milk from the udder to 
the teat. 
dy haaley, v. to flow with milk. T 
taalit, 85. flowed. 
taarnagh, s. m. thunder; pl. 72 [change -agh 
to -eeyn]. 
dy haarnagh, s. of thunder; pl. 72. T  
taarnee, a. d. of thunder, belonging to 
thunder. 
rooit haarnee, (a peal of thunder) 
sheean haarnee, a. d. the sound or noise of 
thunder T 
taarnaghey, v. thundering. 
dy haarnaghey, v. to thunder. T  
taau or taaue, a. idle; out of employment. 
ny haaue, s. idle. Prov. “Cha vow laue ny 
haaue veg.” [An idle hand will receive 
nothing.] T 
nyn daaue, v. your, &c. being idle, out of 
employ. T 
taauid, s. m. idleness. 
327 
T 
 
taaue, s. f. a squeam or qualm; a reach in 
vomiting; pl. -nyn. 
taaueynee or taauernee, v. reaching or 
forcing to vomit. 
dy haauyrnee, v. to reach in vomiting. T 
tack, s. m. a tax; pl. -yn. 
e hack, s. his tax. T 
tackeydagh, s. m. a person taxed; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. 
tackeyder, s. m. a taxer, an usurer; pl. -yn. 
taggad, s. f. a tack or tache, a small nail; pl. 
-yn. 
e haggad, s. his tack, or small nail. T 
taggloo, v. talking, conversing. 
er haggloo, v. hath, &c. talked. T 
dy haggloo, v. to talk. T 
nyn daggloo, s. your, &c. talk or 
conversation. T 
taghyr, s. m. hap, chance. 
taghyryn, s. pl. a few, some that happen. 
taghyr, v. happen; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
cha daghyr, v. will not happen; -in; -ym; 
&c. T 
dy daghyragh, v. if would happen. T 
haghr or haghyr, v. happened, did happen; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -yms; -ys, 94, T 
taghyrt, v. happening, occurring. 
dy haghyrt, v. to happen. T 
er daghyrt, v. hath, &c. happened. T 
taghyrit, 85. happened. 
drogh-haghyrt, s. m. a disaster, an ill hap. 
trooid-taghyrt, adv. accidentally. 
taghys, s. f. itch; pl. -yn. 
e haghys, s. his itch. T 
nyn daghys, s. your, &c. itch. T 
taghyssagh, a. itchy, infected with itch. 
s’taghyssagh, a. how itchy. T 
s’taghyssee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. T 
ro haghyssagh, a. too itchy. T 
taill, s. f. the rynd that bears the millstone. 
taill, v. cut or mark the tally; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
taillit, 85. tallied. 
tailley, s. m. tally; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]; Exod. v. 18: Reue shiu, er-y-fa 
shen, gys nyn obbyr: son cha vow shiu veg y 
choonlagh, ny yeih shegin diu tailley ny 
breekyn y choyrt stiagh. Go therefore now, and 
work; for there shall no straw be given you, yet 
shall ye deliver the tale of bricks. 
tailleyder, s. m. one who tallies. 
taittyn 
by-haittyn, adv. because of pleasure or 
delight, to pleasure or delight in. 
my haittym, v. if I will have pleasure &c. 
in; -s, id. em. T 
my haittin, v. if I would have pleasure or 
delight. T 
cha daittyn lhiam, v. I had not pleasure or 
delight. T 
taitnys, s. f. pleasure, delight; pl. -yn. 
e haitnys, s. his pleasure. T 
nyn daitnys, s. your, &c. delight or 
pleasure. 
taitnyssagh, a. pleasant, delightful, 
acceptable; Acts, xxiv. 27: Agh ec kione daa 
vleïn haink Porcius Festus ayns ynnyd Felix: as 
son dy row Felix booiagh jannoo nhee 
taitnyssagh da ny Hewnyn, daag eh Paul ny 
phryssoonagh. But after two years Porcius 
Festus came into Felix’ room: and Felix, willing 
to shew the Jews a pleasure, left Paul bound. 
s’taitnyssagh, a. how pleasing, delightful, 
or desirable. T 
s’taitnyssee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. T 
ro haitnyssagh, a. too pleasing. T 
neu-ha[i]tnyssagh, a. unpleasing, 
unpleasant. 
taitnyssid, s. f. pleasantness, 
delightfulness. 
talk, v. walk, walk slowly; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
dalk [ad?,] v. will they walk on slowly [?]. 
cha dalk*, not walk slowly; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms. 94. T 
halk, v. did walk; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. T 
talkal, v. walking slowly. 
dy halkal, v. to walk slowly. T 
er dalkal, v. hath, &c. walked slowly. T 
talkeyder, s. m. a slow walker; pl. -yn. 
talkit, 85. walked in slow pace. 
tallagh, v. murmuring, grumbling, 
complaining. 
e hallagh, s. his murmuring. T 
328 
T 
 
nyn dallagh, v. your, &c. murmuring, 
grumbling. T 
tallit, 85. murmured, grumbled. 
talleyder, s. m. a murmurer, &c.; pl. -yn. 
tammylt, s. m. a while; pl. -yn. 
e hammylt, s. his while. T 
tammyltagh, a. in whiles, nows and thens. 
[‘occasional’] 
s’tammyltagh, a. how much in whiles. See 
58 [s’tammyltee, comp. and sup.,]. T 
tann, v. tarry, continue, abide; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
hann* or hannee, v. did abide, continue, 
tarry, or endure; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; 
-ys, 94. T 
tannaght or tannaghtyn, v. continuing, 
tarrying, abiding, or continueth, tarrieth, 
abideth, or endureth. 
dy hannaght or hannaghtyn, to continue, 
abide, tarry, or endure. 
er dannagh or er dannaghtyn, v. hath, 
&c., continued, remained, abode, &c. T 
tannit, 85. continued, &c. 
tanneyder, s. m. an abider or continuer. 
tannaghtagh 
s’tannaghtagh, a. how continual, &c. T 
s’tannaghtee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. 
T 
tannys, s. f. tenantry, tenant; pl. -yn. 
e hannys, s. his tenantry or tenant. T 
nyn dannys, your, &c. tenantry or tenants. 
tannyssagh, a. tenantable. 
tapp, s. m. a plaything, a top; pl. -yn. 
e happ, s. his top; pl. -yn. T 
tappag, s. f. a tuft of feathers, or hair on the 
head; pl. -yn. 
e happag, s. his tuft. T 
tappagh 
ushag happagh, s. f. the lark or tuft bird. [l. 
happagagh ?] 
tappagagh, a. tufty, having tufts. 
s’tappagagh, a. how tufty. T 
s’tappagee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. T 
tappagit, 85. tufted. 
tappee, a. quick, fast, speedy. 
s’tappee, a. how quick, fast, or rapid. 
tappeeys or tappeeid, s. m. speed, 
quickness, fastness of motion. 
tappey, s. m. temperament, temperature, 
equanimity of temper. That which a person 
loses, when he gives way to passion; chaill 
ad nyn dappey (they lost their evenness of 
temper). 
nyn dappey, your, &c. temperature o[r] 
temper. T 
tarlheim (sic: stress), v. alight, alighting, 
coming down from a horse or beast on 
which a person rides; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms. 87; -ys, 88. 
harlheim, v. did alight; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
tarlheimit, 85. alighted. 
tarlheiman, s. m. a stile or step, made use 
of when mounting on, or alighting off, a 
beast. 
tarmayney, v. managing well, making the 
best of things. 
tarmaynit, 85. managed well. 
tarmaynagh, a. economical, managing 
well, husbanding; s. m. an economist; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. 
s’tarmaynagh, a. how economical. T 
s’tarmaynee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. T 
tarmaynys, s. f. economy, good 
management; pl. -syn. 
e harmaynys, s. his economy. T 
tarragh, s. m. a girth; pl. 72 [change -agh to 
-eeyn]. 
e harragh, s. his girt[h]. T 
tarree, a. d. of a girth. 
tarroo, s. m. Taurus, a bull. 
e harroo, s. his bull. T 
tarroo-deyill, s. m. the bull-worm. 
tarroo-ollee, s. m. a cow’s bull, in 
opposition to other bulls. 
tarroo-puhttagh, s. m. a pushing bull. 
tarroo-ushtey, s. m. a nondescript animal. 
teirroo, s. pl. bulls; Psalms, l. 13: Vel oo 
smooinaghtyn dy nee-ym feill teirroo: as dy 
niu-ym fuill goair? Thinkest thou that I will eat 
bulls’ flesh: and drink the blood of goats? 
terriu, s. pl. bulls; Jer. l. 11: Er-yn-oyr dy 
ren shiu boggyssagh as craid, shiuish 
stroideryn my eiraght; son dy vel shiu er n’aase 
329 
T 
 
roauyr myr yn cholbagh ec faiyr, as dy vel shiu 
buirroogh myr terriu. Because ye were glad, 
because ye rejoiced, O ye destroyers of mine 
heritage, because ye are grown fat as the 
heifer at grass, and bellow as bulls.  
therriu, s. pl. bulls; Gen. xxxii. 15: Jeih 
camelyn as feed bluight, marish ny sharree, da-
eed booa, as jeih terriu, feed assyl bwoirryn, 
as jeih sharree. Thirty milch camels with their 
colts, forty kine, and ten bulls, twenty she 
asses, and ten foals. 
e herriu, s. his bulls. T 
tarroogh, a. thrifty, industrious. 
s’tarroogh, a. how thrifty, comp. and sup. 
T 
ro harroogh, a. too thrifty. T 
neu-harroogh, a. unthrifty, careless. 
tarrooghid or tarrooghys, s. f. thrift, 
thriftiness, industry. 
e harrooghid, s. his thriftiness or thrift. T 
drogh-harrooghys, s. m. ill thrift; Eccl. v. 
14: Agh ta’n verchys cheddin cherraghtyn 
liorish drogh-harrooghys; as t’eh geddyn mac 
as cha vel nhee erbee ny laue. But those riches 
perish by evil travail: and he begetteth a son, 
and there is nothing in his hand. 
tash, a. damp, dank, moist. 
s’tash, a. how damp or moist. T 
s’tashey, a. id., comp. and sup. T 
ro hash, a. too damp. T 
tashagh, v. getting damp, damping. 
dy hashagh, v. to dampen. T 
tashid, s. m. dampness, moisture. 
e hashid, s. his dampness. T 
tasht, v. treasure, keep, store; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
dasht oo, v. wilt thou keep or treasure [?]; 
-ag[h]; -ee; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
hasht, v. did treasure up in store; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -ym; -ys, 94. T 
tashtey, v. treasuring, storing, depositing. 
dy hashtey, v. to treasure or store. T 
tashtaghyn, pl.  
nyn dashtaghyn, s. pl. your &c. treasures. 
T 
tashtee, a. d. of treasuring or keeping store. 
hashtee, a. d. of treasure. T 
tashtit, 85. treasured, stored. 
ro hashtit, 85. too treasured. T  
lioar-hasht, s. f. a library; pl. -yn. 
tashteyder, s. m. a treasurer, a storer. 
e hashteyder, s. his treasurer. T 
tast, v. heed, attend, notice, observe; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. 
cha dast, v. not heed, or not led to be 
mindful, or pay attention to; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
hast, v. did heed or heeded; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. 
tastal, v. heeding, attending to, observing. 
dy hastal, v. to heed, to attend to what is 
said, done, bid, or directed. T 
tastit, 85. heeded, observed. 
tastey, s. m. notice, heed, observation. 
e hastey or hastid, s. his intellect, sagacity, 
heed, notice. T 
nyn dastey, s. your, &c. notice, heed, &c. T 
tasteyder, s. m. one who heeds. 
tastagh, a. knowing, sagacious, intelligent, 
discerning. 
s’tastagh, a. how intelligent or quick of 
discernment. T 
s’tastee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. T 
ro hastagh, a. too sharp of notice; gyere 
hastagh (sharp of notice, heedful). T 
lhag-hastagh, a. weak in knowledge or 
understanding; Pro. xvii. 18: [NB the 
citation has lhag-hushtagh, to which the 
definition rather corresponds, not lhag-
hastagh] Ta’n dooinney lhag-hushtagh coyrt 
e laue, as t’eh goll raane fenish e charrey. A 
man void of understanding striketh hands, and 
becometh surety in the presence of his friend. 
meehastagh, a. heedless, inattentive; s. m. 
an inattentive person; pl. 71 [change -agh 
to -ee]. 
neu-hastagh, a. unmindful, insensible, 
regardless. 
tastid, s. m. sagacity, attention. 
taster, s. m. a thresher with a flail; pl. -yn. 
e hastder, s. his thresher. T 
tasteraght, v. threshing; Isa. xli. 15: Cur-
my-ner, nee’m oo y yannoo myr greïe noa 
gyere-feeacklagh, ry-hoi tasteraght: as nee oo 
tasteraght ny sleityn, as broo ad dy myn, as 
nee oo ny croink myr coau. Behold, I will make 
330 
T 
 
thee a new sharp threshing instrument having 
teeth: thou shalt thresh the mountains, and 
beat them small, and shalt make the hills as 
chaff. 
tasterys, s. f. the threshing. 
tauint, v. saunter; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
tauintyraght, v. sauntering. 
tauintyrys, s. f. the action of sauntering. 
tayr, v. catch. The Methodist Hymn Book 
has it thayr, which spelling I would have 
adopted, but that it is not in our translation 
of the scriptures. See also taare; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88. 
taar or taare, v. catch. See also tayr; the 
three words are used for the same 
meaning; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
daare or daar*, v. catch; as, daare oo 
(canst thou catch[?]). See also dayr; both 
words are used in the Scriptures; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
cha dayr, v. not catch; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; 94. See also daare. T 
haare, v. did catch, caught. See hayr. T  
hayr or hayrr*, v. caught, catched, or did 
catch; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 88. 
Prov. “Eshyn ghuirrys skeilley hayrrys 
skeilley.” [He who hatches harm catches 
harm.] T 
tayrtyn, v. catching. 
tayrit, 85. caught. 
s’taarit, a. how caught or taken. T 
tayreyder, s. m. a catcher; pl. -yn. 
taaree, s, f. a worthless catch, a trifle; pl. 
-yn. 
tharee, s. See taaree. 
e hayree, s. his worthless catch. T 
tayrn, s. m. a draw; pl. -yn. 
tayrn, v. draw, deduce; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
cha dayrn, v. not draw<n>; -agh; -in; -it, 
85; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
hayrn, v. drew, did draw; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
tayrnit, 85. drawn, deduced. 
s’tayrnit, a. how drawn. T 
ro hayrnit, 85. too drawn. T 
ass-tayrn, s. f. a rush candle case. 
tayrneyder, s. m. a drawer; pl. -yn. 
e hayrneyder, s. his drawer. T 
tead or teid, s. m. a rope, pl. -dyn. See 
Walker’s Dictionary on the word tether. 
teidd or tedd. See tead; a rope or tether. 
e heidd, s. his rope or tether. T 
teaum, v. teem, empty, pour out; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
heaum, v. did teem, teemed; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -it; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
teaumey, v. teeming, pouring. 
dy heaumey, v. to teem or pour. T 
teaumee, a. d. of teeming. 
teaumit, 85. teemed, emptied. 
s’teaumit, a. how teemed or emptied of 
water. T 
ro heaumit, 85. too teemed or emptied. T 
teaum, s. m. a teem, spill or pour; pl. 
-aghyn [pl. of teaumey ?]. 
teaumeyder, s. m. a teemer; pl. -yn. 
e heaumeyder, s. his teemer. T 
teaym, s. f. a whim, conceit, an odd freak, 
fancy, or fit; pl. -yn. 
e heaym, s. his whi[m]. T 
teaymagh, a. whimsical, fantastical, 
freakish, heady; 2 Tim. iii. 4: Traitooryn, 
teaymagh, ard-aignagh, ny s’graihee er 
eunyssyn y vea shoh na er Jee. Traitors, 
heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures more 
than lovers of God. 
s’tea[y]magh, a. how whimsical, freakish, 
or fantastic. T 
s’tea[y]mee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. T 
ro heaymagh, a. too whimsical. T 
teaymid, s. m. whimsicalness, headiness, 
&c. 
teayst, s. f. dough; pl. -yn. 
theayst, s. f. dough; Jer. vii. 18: Ta'n chloan 
teiy spollagyn, as ta ny ayraghyn foaddey yn 
aile, as ny mraane fuinney yn theayst, dy vroie 
keeakyn da ben-reïn yn aer… The children 
gather wood, and the fathers kindle the fire, 
and the women knead their dough, to make 
cakes to the queen of heaven. See also teayst. 
nyn deayst, s. your, &c. dough. T 
Juan-teayst, s. m. the jack-daw. 
teaystagh, a. doughy, not hardened. 
331 
T 
 
teaystag, s. f. a dumpling; pl. -yn. 
teaystn* or teaystnee, v. knead, or bake; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
cha deaystn* or deaystnee, v. not knead; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym 94. T 
heaystn or heaystnee, v. did knead or 
kneaded; -agh; -in; -ins; -it; -ym; -yms; 
-ys, 94. T 
teaystney, v. kneading. 
dy heaystney, v. to knead. T 
er deaystney, v. hath, &c. kneaded. T 
teaystnee, a. d. of kneading. 
teaystnit, 85. kneaded. 
teaystneyder, s. m. a kneader; pl. -yn. 
teigh, s. f. a hatchet; pl. -yn. 
e heigh, s. his hatchet; pl. -yn. T 
nyn deigh, s. your, &c. hatchet; pl. -yn. T 
teiy, v. pick, gather, pick up; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. Prov. “Raad ta jees ta reih, as raad ta 
troor ta teiy.” [Where there are two there is 
choice, and where there are three there is 
pick.] 
heigh or heiy, v. did peck or pick; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
teiyt, 85. picked, gathered. 
ro height, 85. too pecked or picked. T  
teiyder, s. m. a picker; pl. -yn. 
teks, s. m. a text; pl. -yn. 
tempr 
hempr, v. did temper, tempered; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
tempreil, v. 
dy hempreil, v. to temper. T 
temprit 
ro hemprit, 85. too tempered. T 
tempyr 
e hempyr, s. his temper. T 
tend, v. attend, wait on; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
dend, v. 7 attend; as, mannagh dend eh (if 
he attend not); -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -ys, 94. 
T 
hend, v. attended, did attend; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
tendeil, v. attending, waiting on. 
dy hendeil, v. to attend. T 
tendit, 85. attended, waited on. 
s’tendit, a. how attended. T 
tendreil, s. m. lightning. Ten from teine (fire), 
Erse; and dreil from drillin, (a small 
particle of fire) 
dy hendreil, s. of lightning. T 
tendreilagh, a. having lightning. 
tennalt 
daa hennalt, s. two tenons; Exod. xxvi. 17: 
Bee daa hennalt ayns un voayrd, kiart ry-
cheilley; shoh myr nee oo ooilley buird y 
chabbane. Two tenons shall there be in one 
board, set in order one against another: thus 
shalt thou make for all the boards of the 
tabernacle. T 
terrish, s. m. something severe. 
tesmad, s. f. (from tessen and maidjey) across 
stick or bar, a step or rundle in a ladder, a 
bar in a barrow, &c.; pl. -yn. [cf. kesmad] 
e hesmad, s. his cross-bar or rundle. T 
tessen, a. cross, transverse, athwart. 
s’tessen, a. cross or transverse, comp. and 
sup. T 
ro hessen, a. too cross or transverse. T 
bossan tessen, s. m. crosswort. 
crantessen, s. m. diameter; pl. -yn. 
feyshtey-tessen, v. cross examining. 
tessenagh, adv. transversely, &c. 
tessenid, s. m. crossness. 
tey, s. m. tea; pl. -ghyn. 
thaal, s. an adze; pl. -yn. 
e haal, s. his adze. T 
thaggyr, s. f. a large drain over a stream. 
thaish, s. f. noise made by the emission of a 
person’s breath, conversing not louder than 
the breath; hug me enney er liorish yn 
thaish echey cheayl mee thaish jeh [I 
recognised him by the murmur of him.] 
According to Mr. Macpherson thaish or 
taise, in Celtic, means a ghost. 
thalhear, s. m. a tailor; pl. -yn. 
nyn daleair, s. your, &c. tailor. T 
thalk-noa, a. spick-span new. 
dy halk-noa, of spick and span new. T 
thalloo, s. m. land, terra, earth. I have marked 
this word as I think it ought to be, as 
332 
T 
 
passages are at variance on its gender. See 
Psl. cvi. 17: Myr shen doshil y thalloo, as slug 
eh seose Dathan: as choodee eh sheshaght 
Abiram. So the earth opened, and swallowed 
up Dathan: and covered the congregation of 
Abiram; and Mark, iv. 28: Son ta’n thalloo 
cur magh mess j’ee hene, hoshiaght yn chass, 
eisht yn jeeas, ny lurg shen, yn arroo creen 
ayns y jeeas. For the earth bringeth forth fruit of 
herself; first the blade, then the ear, after that 
the full corn in the ear. Goll dys thalloo 
(going to stool). 
e halloo, s. his land, earth. T 
nyn dhalloo, s. your, &c. land, earth, terra. 
T 
thallooin, a. d. of land or terra. 
hallooin, a. d. of land or earth. T 
airh-hallooin, s. [f]. yarrow, millfoil. 
balley-hallooin, s. m. a farm. 
craa-hallooin, s. m. an earthquake. 
eerey hallooin, [the length that a plough 
team plough in a field without turning.] 
kione hallooin, s. a cape or promontory. 
pick-hallooin, s. f. slime, bitumen. 
state-hallooin, s. m. a farm; Mat. xxii. 5: 
Agh hoie adsyn beg jeh as hie ad rhymboo, fer 
gys e state-hallooin, as fer elley gys e 
varchantys: But they made light of it, and went 
their ways, one to his farm, another to his 
merchandise. 
thallooinagh, a. territorial, earthy, 
terrestrial, composed of land. 
s’thallooinagh, a. how terrestrial or 
earthly. T  
s’thallooinee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. 
ro hallooinagh, a. too earthly. T 
thallooinid, s. m., thallooinys, s. f. 
earthliness. 
thammag, s. f. a thicket, a bush; pl. -yn. 
e hammag, s. his bush. Prov. “Ta drogh 
hammag ny share na magher foshlit.” [A 
bad bush is better than an open field.] 
nyn dammag, s. your, &c. thicket or bush. 
T 
thammagagh, a. full of thickets, bushy. 
s’thammagagh, a. how bushy. T 
s’thammagee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. 
T 
ro hammagagh, s. too bushy. T 
thann* or thannee, v. thin, rarify; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. 
thannee, v. make thin, rarify. 
hann, v. did make thin or thinned; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
thannaghey, v. making thin. 
thannit, 85. made thin, thinned. 
thanneyder, s. m. one who make thin. 
thanney, a. thin, not thick, tenuous. 
s’thanney, a. how thin. T 
stheinney, a. thinner, thinnest, comp. and 
sup. of thanney. 
ro hanney, a. too thin. 
thannid, s. m. thinness, tenuity, liquidity. 
thannid, s. f. a hoggerel or thave, a sheep in 
its third year. 
thanvanee, v. astonish, amaze. 
thanvanagh, a. astonishing. 
s’thanvanagh, a. how astonishing. T 
s’thanvanee, a. more or most astonishing. 
T 
thanvaneys, s. f. astonishment; Ez. iv. [16]: 
Ny-sodjey, dooyrt eh rhym, Vac y dooinney, 
cur-my-ner, neem’s bun yn arran y vrishey ayns 
Jerusalem, as nee ad arran y ee liorish towse, 
as thanvaneys. Moreover he said unto me, 
Son of man, behold, I will break the staff of 
bread in Jerusalem: and they shall eat bread by 
weight, and with care; and they shall drink 
water by measure, and with astonishment. 
tharmane, s. m. an alarm; Joel, ii. 1: Sheid-jee 
yn trumpet ayns Zion, as trog-jee tharmane 
caggee ayns my chronk casherick: lhig da 
ooilley cummaltee ny cheerey ve er-creau. 
Blow ye the trumpet in Zion, and sound an 
alarm in my holy mountain: let all the 
inhabitants of the land tremble; a confusion or 
confused noise; Isaiah, ix. 5: Son ta dy 
chooilley vagher-caggee yn treanagh lesh 
tharmane boiragh, as garmadyn seiyt ayns 
fuill; agh bee shoh lesh lostey, as stoo son yn 
aile. For every battle of the warrior is with 
confused noise, and garments rolled in blood; 
but this shall be with burning and fuel of fire. 
rumbling; Jer. xlvii. 3: Ec feiyr stampey 
yngnyn e chabbil trean, ec sheean ny fainee, 
as tharmane ny queeylyn, bee ny ayraghyn 
cha lhag-lauee shen nagh bee ad abyl 
333 
T 
 
jeeaghyn lurg nyn gloan hene. At the noise of 
the stamping of the hoofs of his strong horses, 
at the rushing of his chariots, and at the 
rumbling of his wheels, the fathers shall not 
look back to their children for feebleness of 
hands. It is also used for a severe blow or 
stroke. 
e harmane, s. his alarm. T 
tharmanagh, a. noisy, alarming, rushing or 
rustling. 
tharmaneys, s. f. noisiness, or the sound or 
noise of people in confusion. 
tharrar, s. f. an auger; pl. -yn. 
tharrarys, s. f. the work of an auger. 
tharrey, s. f. the essence or best part, the pith 
or juice. 
thartagh, a. costive, bound in the body. 
[‘constipated’] 
s’thartagh, a. how costive or bound. T 
s’thartee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. T 
thassane, s. f. a murmuring noise, as of the 
rolling of a stream of water; the sound of 
unintelligible talk, &c. 
thaue or thoe, v. a word used to drive sheep. 
theay or theo, s. f. the public, the peasantry, 
the common people, the laity, (in 
opposition to the clergy); the vulgar, the 
people of a country, the populace, (in 
opposition to the rulers). Prov. “Stroshey 
yn theay na yn çhiarn.” [The people are 
stronger than the lord.] 
quaiyl-theay, s. f. the common law. 
theinniu, v. thaw, liquify; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-ys, 88. 
henneu, v. thawed, did thaw; -agh; -ys, 94. 
T 
theinniu, v. thawing, liquifying. 
er dhenniu, v. hath, &c, thawed, melted, or 
liquified. T 
theinniuit, 85. thawed. 
s’theinniuit, a. how thawed. T 
ther, s. m. tar; pl. -yn. 
herr, v. tarred, did tar; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. T 
terral, v. 
dy herral, v. to tar, or cover with tar. T 
thie, s. m. a tenement, a house or home; pl. 
-yn. 
e hie, s. his house; pl. -yn. T 
nyn dhie, s. your, &c. house, home; pl. -yn. 
T 
thie baanrit, s. m. a bedlam. 
thie cloie, s. m. a play-house. 
thie errey, s. m. an infirmary. 
thie imbyl, s. m. a brew house. 
thie keesh, s. m. a custom house. 
thie kiark, s. m. a hen house. 
thie lhionney, s. m. an ale house. 
thie mergee, s. [m.] a market-house. 
thie oast, s. m. an inn, a public house. 
thie ollee, s. [m.] a cow-house. 
thie smaght, s. m. a house of correction. 
thie souree, s. [m.] a summer house. 
thie stoyr, s. m. a store or warehouse. 
thie veaghee, s. f. a dwelling house. 
thie veg, s. f. a necessary or privy. 
banistie, s. m. housewifery, the 
management of house affairs or of a family 
by a mistress. 
ben-thie, s. f. the woman of the house. 
coamrey-yn-thie, v. keeping the house in 
repair. 
farrys-thie, s. m. management in 
housekeeping, economy. 
fer-thie 
yn er-thie, s. the man of the house; Mat. 
xx. 11: As tra v’ad er ghoaill eh, ren ad tallagh 
noi yn er-thie. And when they had received it, 
they murmured against the goodman of the 
house. F 
far-thie, s. m. (from fer-thie), the man of 
the house. 
far-thie-mooar, s. m. major domo, the 
great man of the house. 
lught-thie, s. m. a household, a family. 
lus-thie, s. f. sengreen, houseleek. 
shooyll-ny-dhieyn, v. begging. 
stoo-thie, s. m. household furniture. 
sthie, adv. in, within, within a house or 
place; opposed to mooie. 
çheu-sthie, s. m. 5. inside. There is a very 
improper change of the word çheu to lheu 
on the south-side of the Island. 
oirr sthie, s. m. the inside edge or verge. 
stiagh, adv. in, into; opposed to magh (out) 
çheet-stiagh, s. m. 5. an income; pl. -yn. 
334 
T 
 
goaill-stiagh, v. including, taking in. 
thieoil, a. domestic. 
thieoilagh. s. m. a domestic; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee]. 
thioll, v. bore, pierce; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
hioll or hoyll, v. did bore or perforate, 
bored, perforated; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. Psl. xxii. 17: Hoyll ad my 
laueyn as my chassyn: foddym ooilley my 
chraueyn y choontey: t’ad shassoo gindys as 
jeeaghyn orrym. They pierced my hands and 
my feet; I may tell all my bones: they stand 
staring and looking upon me. T 
hoyll, v. did bore or perforate. See also 
hioll. T 
thiolley, v. boring holes. 
dy hiolley, v. to bore, to perforate. T 
thiollit, 85. bored, holed. 
s’th[i]ollit, a. how bored or holed. T 
ro hiollit, 85. too bored or perforated. T  
thiolley, s. f. a thowl; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
thiolleyder, s. m. a borer; pl. -yn. 
thit, s. f. a lisp; pl. -yn. 
thittagh, a. lisping. 
thoagan, v. gape with the mouth open, 
staring; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
thoaganagh, s. m. one who gapes or stares. 
thoaganys, s. f. gaping, staring. 
thollane, s. m. a dizzard, dizziness. 
thollaneagh, a. dizzy, capricious. 
s’thollanagh, a. how, dizzy, heady or 
capricious. T 
s’thollanee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. T 
ro hollaneagh, a. too dizzy or heady. T 
thollaneys, s. f. caprice, giddiness. 
e hollaneys, s. his dizziness. T 
thollog, s. f. a crab louse; pl. -yn. 
thollog faiyr, s. f. a shrew mouse, a field 
mouse. 
tholtan, s. m. a house in ruins or in a ruinous 
state, a house left to have holes in its roof; 
pl. -yn. 
e holtan, s. his old house in decay. T 
nyn dholtan, s. your, &c. house in ruins, T 
Thomaase, s. m. Thomas. 
e Hom, s. his Thom. T 
e Homase, s. his Thomas. T 
Thomys, a. d. of Thomas. 
thoo, s. m. thatch; pl. -ghyn. 
thooee, a. d. of thatch. 
thoo, v. thatch; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
hoo, v. did thatch or thatched; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
thooit, 85. thatched, covered with thatch. 
s’thooit, a. how thatched. T 
goal-thoo, s. thatch held or made sure on a 
house, &c., by forks made of briars or 
wattles, which are cut in short junks, bent, 
twisted and pointed, and pushed through 
the thatch into the straw to bind the thatch 
on; whence. I suppose. this kind of 
thatching takes its name. 
goal-thoo, v. thatching in the above 
manner; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; 
-ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
gallthoo. See goal-thoo. 
thooder, s. m. a thatcher; pl. -yn. 
e hooder, s. his thatcher. T 
thooane, s. f. a rib or lath on the roof of a 
house under the scraws; pl. -yn. 
thooaney, v. ribbing or lathing. 
thooilley, s. f. a torrent, a flood, an inundation 
or deluge; pl. 67 [change -ey to -aghyn]. 
ny hooilley, s. a flood; Gen. ix. 15: As 
cooin-yms er my chonaant, ta eddyr mish as 
shiuish, as dy chooilley chretoor bio, jeh dy 
chooilley eill; as cha jig ny ushtaghyn arragh, 
dy ve ny hooilley dy stroie dy chooilley eill. 
And I will remember my covenant, which is 
between me and you and every living creature 
of all flesh; and the waters shall no more 
become a flood to destroy all flesh. T 
roish y thooilley, a. antideluvian. 
thoot or toot, s. m. a booby, an idiot; pl. -yn. 
toot, s. m. an oaf, an idiot; pl. -yn. I think 
this word is better written thoot. 
e hoot, s. his oaf. See toot. T 
thootagh, a. oafish, not having 
commonsense. 
s’tootagh, a. how oafish. T 
s’tootee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. T 
335 
T 
 
ro hootagh, a. too much an oaf or idiot. T 
thootid, s. m. oafishness, idiotism. 
thootçh or thootçhey, s. m. a short space of 
time. 
thoree, s. m. a highwayman, one that robbeth 
on the highway; pl. -yn. 
e horee, s. his highwayman; pl. -yn. T 
thoreeagh, v. committing robbery on the 
highway. 
thoreeaght, v. 
dy horeeaght, v. to rob on the highway. T 
thoreeaght or thoreeys, s. f. robbery, 
highway robbery. 
dy horeeys, s. of highway robbery. T 
thornane, s. m. a wooden hammer or mallet; 
pl. -yn, or 69 [change -e to -yn]. 
thorran, s. f. a dunghill; pl. -yn. 
ny horran, s. a dunghill; Ezra, vi. 11: Quoi-
erbee hed noi’n order shoh, lhig da fuygh ve 
raipit neose jeh e hie, as soit seose: lhig da-
hene ve croghit er, as e hie ve jeant ny horran 
son shoh. Whosoever shall alter this word, let 
timber be pulled down from his house, and 
being set up, let him be hanged thereon; and 
let his house be made a dunghill for this. T 
thorranagh 
s’thorranagh, a. how full of dunghills. T 
s’thorranee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. T 
thort, s. f. consideration, circumspection, 
heed, thought or thoughtfulness; hardly 
ever used but in the negative. See gyn-tort. 
e hort, s. his heed, thought, &c. T 
nyn dort, s. your, &c. thoughtfulness, &c. 
T 
gyn-tort, a. without thought or 
consideration; s. incircumspection. 
thousane, s. m. a thousand; pl. -yn. 
daa housane, s. two thousand. T 
thow, s. m. a line used to tie the buoy to the 
net in fishing; pl. -ghyn. 
thow, v. tow, haul; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
e how, s. his buoy line; pl. -yn. T 
how, v. did tow, towed, drag by a rope on 
the water; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms;. -ys, 
94  
thowal, v. towing, hauling. 
thowit, 85. towed, hauled. 
thowder, s. m. a tower, a hauler. 
thowt, s. m. a thwart; pl. -yn. 
thoyn or thoin, s. f. the arse, anus or 
fundament; thoyn ry hoyn, (to draw tails). 
e hoyn, s. his anus or bottom. T 
nyn doyn, s. your, &c. anus or bottom. T 
thoanney, a. d. of the backside, or bottom 
of the arse or anus. 
hoaney, a. d. of the anus. T 
toanney. See thoanney. 
agherey-hoaney, s. f. a crupper. 
three. See troor. 
e hree, s. his three; 1 Sam. xxxi. 6: Myr shoh 
hooar Saul baase, marish e hree mec, as e 
armyder, as ooilley ny deiney va mygeayrt-y-
mysh myrgeddin, er y laa cheddin. So Saul 
died, and his three sons, and his armourbearer, 
and all his men, that same day together. T 
ad ny dhree, s. they the three. T 
trass, a. third, the ordinal of troor. See also 
tress. 
tress, a. third. See also trass. 
e hrass, s. his third. T 
trass yeig, a. the thirteen. J  
trass yeigoo, a. the thirteenth. J  
troor, a. three; the radical of droor; Gen. 
ix. 19; obsolete in common talk. 
e hroor, a. his three. T 
nyn droor, a. these three; Gen. ix. 19: Ad 
shoh nyn droor mec Noah: as lioroosyn va’n 
slane seihll jeant magh lesh cummaltee. These 
are the three sons of Noah: and of them was 
the whole earth overspread. Num. xii. 4: As 
loayr y Chiarn dy siyragh rish Moses, as rish 
Aaron, as rish Miriam, Tar-jee magh nyn droor 
gys y chabbane agglish. As haink ad nyn droor 
magh. And the Lord spake suddenly unto 
Moses, and unto Aaron, and unto Miriam, 
Come out ye three unto the tabernacle of the 
congregation. And they three came out. T 
threshtee, s. f. the third course of sods on a 
fold hedge. 
treen, s. f. a township that divides tithe into 
three. 
trooane or troorane, s. a triangle. 
e hruane, s. his triangle. T 
trooaneagh, a. triangular. 
336 
T 
 
thruss, s. f. truss, a bundle of straw; pl. -yn. 
e hruss, s. his truss; pl. -yn. T 
thum or thumm*, v. dip, immerse; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. 
tum, v. See thum. 
cha dum or dumm*, v. not dip or plunge; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. T 
hum or humm*, v. did dip, dipped; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
thummey, v. dipping, immersing; s. m. a 
dip, an immersion; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
dy hummey, v. to dip or plunge. T 
er dummey, v. hath, &c. dipped, plunged, 
&c. T 
thummit, 85. dipped. 
s’thummit, a. how dipped. T 
thummeyder, s. m. a dipper; pl. -yn. 
thummid, s. m. bulk, size. 
e hummid, s. his size or bulk. T 
nyn dummid, s. your, &c. bulk, &c. T 
thummidagh, a. bulksome, lumbersome. 
s’thummidagh, a. how bulksome. T 
s’thummidee; a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. 
T 
ro hummidagh, a. too bulksome. T 
thunnag, s. f. a duck; pl. -yn. 
e hunnag, s. his duck. T 
thunney, s. m. a ton; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
daa hunney, s. two tons; pl. 67. T 
thurn 
e hurn, s. his job; drogh-hurn (a bad job). 
T 
thurn-mie, s. a good turn or job. 
drogh-hurn, s. m. an ill turn or job. 
thurrick. s. f. a short space of time. A low 
word. 
thurrys, s. f. a tour, journey, mission. 
çhyrrys : [Sam. xvii. 28…cha row chyrrys 
ayd ayns shoh, agh dy akin y chaggey. …for 
thou art come down that thou mightest see the 
battle.] 
e hyrrys, s. his tour or journey. This word 
appears, by Sam. xvii. 28, to be from çh, 
but which seems to me to be from t. 
thurryssagh, s. m. a tourist; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee]. 
tidey, s. f. tide; pl. 67 [change -ey to -aghyn]; 
tidey-hraie, (the ebb tide). See also, mooir-
hraie, yn tidey-varrey, (the sea tide). 
e hidey, s. his tide; pl. 67. T 
tidee, a. d. of the tide or tides. 
tilg, v. throw, cast, vomit; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
dhilg, v. will, &c. throw or cast; -agh; -in; 
-ym, &c. T 
cha dilg, v. not throw or cast; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms, 94. T 
hilg, v. did throw or cast; threw, or threw 
up, vomited; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -ym; -ys, 
94. T 
tilgey, v. throwing, casting, vomiting. 
dy hilgey, v. to throw, to vomit, to eject by 
vomit. T 
er dhilgey, v. hath, &c, thrown up, 
vomited. T 
tilgit, 85. thrown, cast, vomited. 
tilgey, s. m. a vomit, an abortion or 
miscarriage in beasts. pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
tilgee, a. d. of vomiting or throwing up. 
tilgeyder, s. m. a thrower, a caster. 
tingleyr, s. m. a tinker; pl. -yn. 
tingleyragh, a. d. of a tinker. 
tingleyrys, s. f. the trade or craft of a tinker. 
toallee or thollee, a. great of stature, tall and 
corpulent withal, robust, athletic. 
toallee, a. tall and strong, robust, athletic, 
corpulent; Deu. i. 28: Ta’n sleih ny s’troshey, 
as ny s'toallee na shinyn. The people is 
greater and taller than we; and ii. 10: Ren ny 
Emimee cummal ayn rish earishyn foddey, 
pobble mooar as ymmodee,toallee myr ny 
Anakimee. The Emims dwelt therein in times 
past, a people great, and many, and tall, as the 
Anakims. 
ro hoallee, a. too robust, tall and strong. T 
ro hollee. See hoallee. T 
toar, toarr* or toarrey, v. dung; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. 
hoar, v. did dung, or dunged; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
337 
T 
 
toarragh or toarraghey, v. dunging, 
manuring by cattle, &c.; dunging the land. 
dy hoaragh or hoaraghey, v. to dung or 
manure with dung. T 
toarrit, 85. dunged. 
s’toarit, a. how dunged. T 
ro hoarit, 85. too dunged., &c. T 
toarrey, s. m. a dung; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
e hoarey, s. his dung, &c. T 
toarreyder, a. m. a dunger; pl. -yn. 
tobbyr, s. f. a f<r>ont; pl. -yn. 
e hobbyr, s. [his] font. T 
tubbir or tubbyr, s. f. a laver, a font; pl. 
-yn 
togher, v. wind yarn or thread; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
hogher, v. did wind, wound; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
togherys, v. winding; also said of a 
pregnant woman. 
dy hogherys, v. to wind on a ball or 
bottom. T 
croan-togherys 
yn chron-togherys, s. the winding blades. 
togherit or toghrit, 85. wound. 
s’togherit, a. how wound up. T 
ro hogherit, 85. too wound up. T 
toghreyder, s. m. a winder; pl. -yn. 
toght, v. choke, strangle; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
cha doght, v. not choke or strangle; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym, 94. T 
hoght, v. did choke, choked; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
toghtey, v. choking, strangling. 
dy hoghtey, v. to choke, to strangle. T 
er dogh[t]ey, v. hath, &c. choked, &c. T 
toghtee, a. d. of choking or strangling. 
toghtit, 85. choked, strangled; Acts, xv. 29: 
Shiu dy reayll shiu hene veih bee chebbit gys 
jallooyn, as veih fuill, as veih reddyn toghtit as 
veih maarderys: voue shoh my reaillys shiu 
shiu-hene, nee shiu dy mie. That ye abstain 
from meats offered to idols, and from blood, 
and from things strangled, and from fornication: 
from which if ye keep yourselves, ye shall do 
well. 
s’toghtit, a. how choked or strangled. T 
ro hoghtit, 85. too choked or strangled. T 
toghteyder, s. m. one who chokes. 
toghyr, s. f. dowry, portion; pl. -yn. 
dty hoghyr, s. thy portion or dowry. T 
nyn doghyr, s. your, &c. dowry or 
marriage portion. T 
toig or toigg*, v. understand; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
cha doig, v. will not understand; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms, 94. T 
hoig or hoigg*, v. understood, did 
understand, had knowledge of; Mat. xiv. 
35: As tra hoig cummaltee yn voayl shen quoi 
v’eh, hug ad fys magh gys ooilley yn cheer 
mygeayrt, as hug ad lhieu huggey ooilley adsyn 
va doghanit. And when the men of that place 
had knowledge of him, they sent out into all that 
country round about, and brought unto him all 
that were diseased; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
-yms; -ys, 94. T 
toiggal, s. f. understanding. 
dy hoiggal, v. to understand. T 
nyn doiggal, s. your, &c. understanding. T 
er doiggal, v. hath, &c. understood. T 
toiggit, 85. understood. 
s’toiggit, a. how understood. T 
ro hoiggit, 85. too understood. T 
toiggeyder, s. m. one who understands. 
toiggalagh or toiggaltagh, a. having 
understanding; s. m. a person that 
understands; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]. 
s’toiggaltagh, a. how knowing or able to 
understand, how skilful in judgment. T 
s’toiggaltee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. T 
neu-hoiggaltagh, a. not having 
understanding, ignorant. 
toiggaltys, s. f. intellect, understanding. 
toill, v. earn, deserve; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
cha doill, v. merit, earn, or deserve not; 
-agh;. -in; -ins; -ym, -yms, 94. T 
hoil or hoill*, v. did deserve, merit, earn; 
was worthy of reward or punishment; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
toilliu, v. earning, deserving, meriting. 
dy hoilliu, v. to deserve or merit rewards or 
punishments. T 
338 
T 
 
er doilliu, v. hath, &c. deserved, merited or 
earned. Er doilliu to reward, &c. T 
toillit, 85. earned, deserved. 
s’toillit, a. how earned or deserved. T 
ro hoillit, 85. too earned, merited. T 
toilleyder, s. m. one who earns or deserves. 
toilçhin, v. deserving, meriting, demeriting. 
er hoilçhin, v. hath, &c. deserved, earned, 
merited. T 
er doilçhin, v. hath, &c. merited, &c. T 
toilçhinagh, a. meritorious, meritorial. 
s’toilçhinagh, a. how meritorious. T 
s’toilçhinee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. T 
toilçhinagh, a. d. 
hoilçhinagh, a. d. of merit, meritorial, of 
deservings. T 
toilçhinys, s. f. deservings, merits. 
dty hoilçhinys, s. thy merit or deserving. T 
nyn doilçhinys, s. your, &c. deservings, 
merits or deserts. T 
tonn, s. f. a wave; pl. -yn. 
e honn, s. his wave; pl. -yn. T 
tonnagh, a. wavy. 
tooill, v. toil, labour; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
hooill, v. did toil or tire; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
tooilleil, v. tolling, tireing. 
dy hooilleil, v. to toil or <toiled>[tire]. T 
to[o]illit, 85. toiled, fatigued. 
s’tooillit, a. how toiled or weary. T 
ro hooillit, 85. to[o] toiled or tired. T 
tooilleil, s. f. toil, fatigue. 
tooilleilagh, a. tiresome, toilsome, 
laborious. 
ro hooilleilagh, a. too toilsome, &c. T 
tooilleyder, s. m. a toiler; pl. -yn. 
tooilley or tooilliu, a. more, more besides 
what is. 
tooir, v. 
hooir, v. did forebode or threaten; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
toor, s. m. a tower; pl. -yn. 
e hoor, s. his tower; pl. -yn. T 
nyn door, s, your, &c. tower; pl. -yn. T 
tooragh, a. towery. 
ro hooragh, a. too towery. T 
tooran, s. f. a turret, a small tower; a round 
corn stack; pronounced thurran; pl. -yn. 
thurran, s. See tooran. 
e hoorran or hurran, s. his round corn 
stack. T 
e hurran. See hoorran. T 
tootey, s. f. what might adhere by touching. 
torcan, s. f. suffocating fume, reek vapour of 
smoke; Acts, ii. 19: As soilshee-ym yindyssyn 
ayns yn aer heose, as cowraghyn er y thalloo 
wass; fuill as aile, as torcan dy yaagh. And I 
will shew wonders in heaven above, and signs 
in the earth beneath; blood, and fire, and 
vapour of smoke; pl. -yn. 
e horcan, s. his suffocating fume. T 
nyn dorcan, s. your, &c. fumes. T 
torcaney, v. 
dy horcaney, v. to stifle with fume. T 
torcanagh, a. fumy, suffocating, reeky. 
s’torcanagh, a. how fumy or reeky. T 
s’torcanee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. T 
torcanys, s. f. suffocation. 
torçh* or torçhee, v. torment; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
cha dorçh or dorçhee, v. not torment; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. T  
horçh or horçhee, v. did torment or 
tormented; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 
94. T 
torçhaghey, v. tormenting, torturing. 
dy horçhagh, v. to torment. T 
er ny horçhaghey, v. being tormented. T 
er ny[n] dorçhaghey, v. being tormented. T 
torçhit, 85. tormented, tortured. 
ro horçhit, 85. too tormented. T  
torçhagh, s. m. torment, torture; pl. -yn. 
nyn dorçhagh, s. your, &c. torment; pl. 
-yn. 
torçheyder, s. m. a tormentor; pl. -yn. 
torragh, a. pregnant. 
thorragh, a. pregnant. See also torragh. 
s’torragh, a. how pregnant. T 
s’torree, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. T 
ben horragh, a. a pregnant woman. T 
trome-torragh, a. big with child. 
thorrid, s. m. pregnancy. 
torrid, s. See thorrid. 
339 
T 
 
toshiaght, s. m. beginning, commencement, 
first, foremost, forepart; pl. -yn. 
er dty hoshiaght, in. go on, go forward; 
p. p. on before thee; -ys, id. em. T 
nyn doshiaght, [s]. our, &c, beginning, &c. 
hoshiaght ooilley, a. first of all. T 
çheet-er-y-hoshiaght, v. 5. coming 
forward, prospering, gaining in any thing. 
goaill-toshiaght, v. beginning, 
commencing. 
toshee, a. foremost. Laa’l Moirrey thoshee 
(Mary’s foremost or first feast). 
fer-toshee, s. m. the foremost, the first in 
procession. 
fer hoshee, a. the first or foremost one. T 
toshiaghey, v. giving beginning, setting 
forward. 
dy hoshiaghey, v. to forward, to expedite. 
T 
toshiagh-jioarey, s. m. a coroner or sheriff, 
a man sworn under the crown or king to 
cite before judges, hold inquests, execute 
writs, executions, &c. The etymology of 
this word, like many other, is hard to find; 
the Scotch Gaelic has taoiseach for a 
chieftain, the Irish have the same word for 
chieftain and captain, from either or both it 
may have been derived; but whence the 
joarey or joaree which is added ? Is it a 
corruption of jeh-ree (of the king), or fo-ree 
(under the king), and changed to jo-ree or 
jo-rey? 
e hoshiagh[-]jiorrey, s. his coroner. T 
toshee-yioarree, s. pl. coroners, shrieves. 
e hoshee[-]yiorrey, s. his coroners. T 
toshtal 
hoshtal, a. left. Would the etymology of 
this word be too far fetched, if it were said 
to be from tasht?—the hand kept or stored 
up more than the other. T 
tost or tostagh, a. silent, tacit. 
ny host, s. silent; Prov. “Ta chengey ny 
host ny share na olk y ghra.” [A silent 
tongue is better than evil speaking.] T 
bee-dty-host, in. silence, or be thou silent. 
nyn dhost, adv. we silent; as, bee mayd nyn 
dhost (we shall be silent). 
dy tostagh, adv. silently, tacitly. 
ro hostagh, a. too tacit or silent. T 
tostid, s. m. silence, tacitness. 
e hostid, s. his silence or tacitness. T 
towl, s. m. a hole; pl. tuill. 
tuill, s. pl. holes; Luke, ix. 58: As dooyrt 
Yeesey rish, Ta tuill ec ny shynnee, as idd ec 
eeanlee yn aer, agh ec Mac yn dooinney cha 
vel boayl, ayn dy chur e chione fo. And Jesus 
said unto him, Foxes have holes, and birds of 
the air have nests; but the Son of man hath not 
where to lay his head.  
thuill, s. pl. holes. 
huill, a. d. of hole or holes. T 
e howl, s. his hole; pl. e huill. T 
e huill, s. his holes. 
nyn dhuill, s. pl. your, &c. holes. T 
towse, s. m. a measure; pl. -yn; It is also made 
use of for weighing; as, tou er ny howse 
ayns ny meihaghayn as er dty gheddyn 
eddrym; Dan. v. 27. [Thou art weighed in 
the scales and found wanting.] 
nyn dowse, s. your, &c. measure. T 
ass-towse, adv. out of measure, 
exceedingly, beyond everything.  
towse, v. measure, weigh; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -yn, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
howsh* or howse, v. did measure, 
measured; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 
94. E [T] 
towse, v. measuring.  
towshit, 85. measured, weighed. 
ro howshit, 85. too measured. T 
towsheyder, s. m. a measurer, a weigher. 
towshan, s. m. a measurement, the 
measure; pl. -yn. 
e howshan, s. his measurement; pl. -yn. T 
nyn dowshan, s. your, &c. measurement. T 
lorg-howshan, s. f. a measuring rule. 
trie-howshan, s. a foot-rule. 
toyrt or toyrtys, s. f. a donation, a present, 
some thing given gratis or unasked; pl. -yn. 
e hoyrt, s. his donation or gift. T 
e hoyrt-booise, s. his giving of thanks. T 
e hoyrtys, s. his donative or present; pl. 
-syn. T 
toyrt-mow, s. f. destruction, damnation, 
desolation; Zep. i. 15: Ta’n laa shen, laa dy 
yymmoose, laa dy hrimshey, as dy arkys, laa 
dy hraartys as toyrt-mow, laa dy ghorraghys 
as dy ghrooid, laa dy vodjallyn as dorraghys 
340 
T 
 
dullyr. That day is a day of wrath, a day of 
trouble and distress, a day of wasteness and 
desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, 
a day of clouds and thick darkness. 
e hoyrt-mow, s. his destruction. T 
nyn doyrt-mow, s. their, &c. destruction. T 
toyrt-mowys, s. f. destructiveness. 
toyrtysagh, s. m. a donor, a bestower; pl. 
71 [change -agh to -ee]. 
traa, s. m. time; pl. -ghyn. 
e hraa, s. his time; pl. -ghyn or -yn. T 
nyn draa, s. our, &c. time. T 
traa-longee, s. [m.] meal-time. 
traa t’ayn, adv. present time, time that is, 
already. 
arrey-traa, a watch, a time-piece. 
ayns-traa, adv. in time, timely. 
cour-y-traa, a. as the time comes. 
lesh-traa, adv. deliberately. 
er-y-traa t’ayn ta lhie yn stayd beayn ain 
(on our present time depends our future 
state). 
foddey dy hraa, adv. for a long time. 
tra, adv. when; used in affirmations and 
assertions, but not in interrogations, except 
when cre’n is placed before it; as, cre’n tra 
(what time). Prov. “Tra ta thie dty naboo 
er aile gow cairail jeh dty hie hene.” 
[When thy neighbour’s house is on fire take 
care of thy own house.] 
traagh, s. f. hay; pl. -yn or -inyn. 
e hraagh, s. his hay; pl. -inyn. T 
nyn draagh, s. your, &c. hay. T 
traart 
ny haart (sic), s. a defeat, rout, or 
overthrow. T 
cur-haart, [v.] overthrow; Job, xxvi. 12: 
T’eh dy rheynn yn aarkey liorish e phooar, as 
liorish e hushtey t’eh cur haart ny mooaralee. 
He divideth the sea with his power, and by his 
understanding he smiteth through the proud. 
traartit 
s’traartit, a. how desolated. T 
trartagh, a. glutted, overstalled. 
[‘surfeited’] 
traartys, s. f. (from treih haghyrtys), 
destruction of inhabitants, desolation; Job. 
v. 22: Er traartys as genney cha jean oo agh 
garaghtee: chamoo gowee oo aggle roish 
beishtyn ny hooirrey. At destruction and famine 
thou shalt laugh: neither shalt thou be afraid of 
the beasts of the earth. 
e hraartys, s. his desolation. T 
nyn draartys, s. your, &c. overthrow. T 
traartyssit, 85. desolated. 
ny haartys (sic), s. a desolation. T 
traartyssagh, a. desolating; s. m. a 
desolater; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]. 
s’traartyssagh, a. how desolating. T 
s’traartyssee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. 
T 
traast, v. squeeze, press; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
hraast, v. did squeeze or press: -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
chraisht, v. did squeeze. This word ought 
to be written hraast; but as it occurs in Jud. 
vi. 38, I have inserted it: As shen myr ve: son 
dirree eh dy moghey laa-ny-vairagh, as hionn 
eh dy-cheilley yn loamrey, as chraisht eh yn 
druight ass y loamrey, lane meïley dy ushtey. 
And it was so: for he rose up early on the 
morrow, and thrust the fleece together, and 
wringed the dew out of the fleece, a bowl full of 
water. T 
traastey, v. squeezing, pressing. 
dy hraastey, v. to squeeze or press. T 
nyn draastey, s. your, &c. squeezing. T 
traastit, 85. squeezed, pressed. 
s’traastit, a. how squeezed. T 
ro hraastit, 85. too squeezed or pressed. T 
traast, s. m. a squeeze; pl. -aghyn. 
traasteyder, s. m. a squeezer; pl. -yn. 
traaue, v. plough; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
hraau* or hraaue, v. did plough, 
ploughed; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 
94. T 
nyn draaue, v. your, &c. ploughing. T 
dy hraaue, v. to plough or make furrows. T 
dy chraaue, v. to plough. This change 
ought not to be. See hraaue. T 
traauee, a. d. of ploughing. 
traauit, 85. ploughed. 
s’traauit, a. how ploughed. T 
ro hraauit, 85. too much ploughed. T 
traaueyder, s. m. See erroo [‘ploughman’]. 
341 
T 
 
traie* or traih, s. f. shore; pl. -yn. 
e hraie, s. his shore; pl. -yn. T 
nyn draie, s. their, &c. shore. T 
traie-varrey, s. f. low-water. 
con[-]traie, s. f. the neap tide. The con in 
this word is supposed to come from coon 
(narrow), as the shore is narrow at this 
time. 
mooir-hraie, s. f. the ebb tide, low water. 
yn vuir[-]hraie, s. the ebb tide. M 
tidey-hraie, (the ebb tide). 
traie* or traih, v. ebb, abate; -agh, 77; -e, 
80; -ys, 88. 
cha draieagh, v. would not, &c. ebb or 
abate. 
hraie, v. did ebb or abate; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
er-draie, v. hath, &c. abated, ebbed, &c. 
trait, 85. ebbed, abated. 
s’traihit, a. how ebbed or abated. T 
straie or straih, a. d. of the shore. 
hollyn[-]straie, s. f. sea holly, eringo. 
traitoor, s. m. a traitor, a betrayer, a 
treacherous person, one who commits 
treason; pl. -yn. 
traitooragh, a. traitorous, treacherous. 
traitoorys, s. f. treason, treachery. 
tramman, a. foul, entangled, amiss. 
s’tramman, a. how foul, wrong, or amiss. 
T 
s’trammaney, a. id., comp. and sup. 
ro hramman, a. too foul or too entangled. 
T 
kione tramman, s. m. the fish bull-head. 
tramman, s. f. the elder tree. 
dy hramman, s. of elder. T 
tramylt, a. sturdy, stout. 
tramyltey, a. pl. sturdy. 
ro hrammylt, a. too sturdy or stout. T 
tranlaase, s. f. tyranny, oppression, 
persecution, severity. 
nyn dranlaase, s. your, &c. tyranny, &c. T 
tranlaas, v. tyrannise, oppress; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. 
cha dranlaasagh, a. would not, &c. 
tyrannise. 
hranlaas* or hranlaase, v. did tyranize or 
oppress; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. 
T 
tranlaasey, v. tyrannising, oppressing, 
persecuting. 
dy hranlaasey, v. to tyranize, oppress, or 
harass. T 
tranlaasit, 85. tyrannised, oppressed, &c. 
s’tranlaasit, a. how tyrannized or 
oppressed. T 
ro hranlaasit, 85. too oppressed, &c. T 
tranlaasagh, s. m. a tyrant, an oppressor, a 
persecutor; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]; a. 
tyrannical, &c. 
s’tranlaasagh, a. how tyrannical or 
oppressive. 
s’tranlaasee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. T 
e hranlaasagh, s. his tyrant or oppressor; 
pl. 71. T 
nyn dranlaasagh, your, &c. tyrant, 
oppressor, &c.; pl. 71. T 
traval, s. f. a trowel; pl. -yn. 
trean, a. valiant, heroic. 
s’trean, a. valiant or stout. T 
s’treaney, a. id., comp. and sup. T 
treaney, a. pl. valiant, mighty. 
ro hrean, a. too valiant or strong; Psl. 
xxxv. 10: Nee ooilley my chraueyn gra, Hiarn, 
quoi ta casley rhyts, ta livrey yn boght veihsyn 
ta ro hrean da: dy jarroo yn boght, as eshyn ta 
ayns treihys, veihsyn ta dy spooilley eh? All my 
bones shall say, Lord, who is like unto thee, 
who deliverest the poor from him that is too 
strong for him: yea, the poor, and him that is in 
misery, from him that spoileth him? T 
treanagh, s. m. a valiant person; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]; valiant persons, the 
mighty; Job, xii. 21: T’eh deayrtey magh 
nearey er princeyn, as t’eh lhaggaghey niart ny 
treanee. He poureth contempt upon princes, 
and weakeneth the strength of the mighty. 
ny hreanagh, s. a valiant man; pl. 71. T 
treanid, s. m. valiantness, might, strength. 
e hreanid, s. his valour or strength. T 
treeah or teush, s. f. used to call a pig. 
treickn, v. beetle, strike with a beetle; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88. 
hreickn* or hreicknee, v. did beetle or 
beat with a beetle; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; 
342 
T 
 
-yms; -ys, 94. T 
treickney, v. striking with a beetle or 
bruiser. 
dy hreickney, v. to beetle or beat. T 
treicknit, 85. beetled, bruised. 
s’treicknit, a. how beetled. T 
ro hreicknit, 85. too beetled or beaten. T 
treickneyder, s. m. one who strikes with a 
beetle. 
treicknane, s. f. a beetle; pl. -yn. 
e hreicknane, s. his beetle; pl. -yn. T 
treig, v. forsake, desert, abandon; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. 
cha dreig, v. not forsake, abandon, or 
leave; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym, 94. T 
hreig or hreigg*, v. did forsake, forsook; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
treigeil, v. forsaking, deserting, 
abandoning. 
er hreigeil or hreigey, v. hath, &c. forsaken 
or abandoned. T 
er dreigeil, v. hath, &c. forsaken, &c. T, 
treigit, 85. forsaken, abandoned, forlorn. 
s’treigit, a. how forsaken. T 
treigeilagh or treigeyder, s. m. a forsaker, 
a deserter; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee] and 
-yn. 
nyn dreigeilagh, s. your, &c. forsaker, 
deserter, &c. T 
treih, a. miserable, wretched, forlorn, 
pitiable; and when applied to complexion 
means sallow, pale, &c. 
s’treih, a. how miserable, wretched, 
forlorn, pitiful, dismal, pale; comp. and sup. 
T 
ro hreih, a. too wretched or miserable, too 
pale, T 
treih-hrimshagh, a. doleful, lamentable. 
treihagh, adv. miserably, pitifully. 
treihid, s. m. miserableness, paleness. 
e hreihid, s. his wretchedness, &c. T 
treihys, s. f. misery; pl. -syn. 
e hreighys, s. his misery; pl. -syn. T 
treill, a. ready to venture. 
trein, v. nail, fasten with nails; -agh, 77; -ee, 
-80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. 
hrein or hreinn*, v. did nail or nailed; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
treiney, v. nailing. 
e hreinney, v. [his] nailing. T 
treinit, 85. nailed, fastened with nails. 
s’treinnit, a. how nailed. 
ro hreinnit, 85. too nailed. T 
treiney, s. f. a nail; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
e hreinney, s. his nail; pl. 67. 
treineyder, s. m. a nailer. 
treisht* or treishteil, s. trust, hope; pl. -yn. 
nyn dreisht, s. your &c., trust, hope, 
confidence, &c. T 
sheckter-ayns-treisht, s. m. administrator. 
meehreisht, s. f. distrust. 
treisht*, v. trust, hope for; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
cha dreisht, v. not trust, confide, &c.; -agh; 
-ee; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. T 
hreisht, v. did trust or hope, trusted; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
treishteil, v. trusting, hoping. 
dy hreishteil, v. to trust or hope. T 
treishtit, 85. trusted, credited. 
s’treishtit, a. how much trusted. T 
ro hreishtit, 85. too much trusted. T 
treishteyder, s. m. one who trusts; pl. -yn. 
treishteilagh, a. worthy of trust, trusty; s. 
m. a trustee; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]. 
s’treishteilagh, a. how trusty. T 
s’treishteilee, a. id, [comp. and sup.,] 58. T 
e hreishteilagh, s. his trustee or trusty one; 
pl. 71. T 
nyn dreishteilagh, s. m. your &c. trustee, 
&c.; pl. 71. T 
neu-hreishteilagh, a. not to be trusted, 
perfidious, treacherous. 
treishteilys, s. f. trustiness, faithfulness, 
fidelity. 
trelleen, s. m. the glanders, a disease which 
horses are subject to. 
e hrelleen, s. his glanders. T 
trelleenagh, a. diseased with the glanders. 
trenshoor, s. f. a trencher; pl. -yn. 
treoghe, a. (from treig) widowed, forsaken. 
s’treoghe, a. how widowed or forsaken; the 
comp. and sup. [is] s’treoghey. T 
ben hreoghe, s. a widow; pl. see mraane, 
343 
T 
 
which word, according to the rules of 
Manks, ought to be the true spelling, and 
not ben-treoghe. T 
ben-treoghe, s. f. a widow; pl. see mraane. 
treoghys, s. f. widowhood; Isa. xlvii. 9: 
Agh berree yn daa red shoh ort’s ’sy tullogh, er 
yn un laa, baase clienney, as treoghys. But 
these two things shall come to thee in a 
moment in one day, the loss of children, and 
widowhood. 
e hreoghys, s. his widowhood. T 
treoghan, s. f. an orphan; pl. -yn. 
trew, s. f. the quincy. This disease is also 
called gorley-plooghee. 
trick, a. quick in succession. 
trie, s. f. a foot, twelve inches; it is also used 
for the sole of the foot; as, fo trie my chass 
(under the sole of my foot); trie oashyr (the 
foot of a stocking); pl. -yn. 
daa hrie, s. two feet in measurement. T 
trie-howshan, s. a foot-rule. 
Trilleen, s. f. the Pleiades. 
trimshagh, a. heavy, sorrowful, mournful, 
grievous; s. m. a sorrowful person; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee]. 
e hrimshagh, s. his sorrowful one; pl. 71. T 
s’trimshagh, a. how sorrowful or 
mournful, how loaded with grief or 
heaviness. T 
s’trimshee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. T 
ro hrimshagh, a. too sorrowful, &c. T 
treih-hrimshagh, a. doleful, lamentable. 
trimshey, s. m. heaviness, grief, sorrow. 
e hrimshey, s. his sorrow or grief. T 
by-hrimshey, adv. for or because of sorrow 
or sadness. 
nyn drimshey, s. your, &c. sorrow, grief, 
&c. T 
trimshey ny hoie, s. the dead of the night. 
Trinaid 
O Hrinaid, s. O Trinity. T 
tro, s. f. trait; as, chied tro. 
troa, s. f. the surge of a stream. 
traw or troa, s. f. the surge of a stream. 
troagyr, v. trudge, march; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
troagyraght, v. trudging, marching. 
troagyrey, s. m. one who trudges; pl. 68 
[change -ey to -eeyn]. 
troagyrit, 85. trudged, marched. 
troailt, v. travelling; labour; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
nyn droailt, s. their, &c. travelling or 
journey, your, &c. labour in child birth. T 
er-troailt, v. travailling in child birth. 
hroailt, v. did travel or travail; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. In expressing this 
word when an adjective, after lhiabbee as 
lhiabbee-hroailt, the r is often omitted or 
not sounded; as, lhiabbee-hoalt (the bed of 
travail or lying-in bed). T 
er-droailt, v. hath, &c. travelled. 
troailtit, 85. travelled, traversed. 
s’t[r]oailtit, a. how travelled. T 
troailtagh, s. m. a traveller; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee]. 
ny hroailtagh, s. a traveller; pl. 71. T 
troailtagh-crauee, s. m. a pilgrim. 
troailtys, s. f. pilgrimage, travel; pl. -syn. 
dty hroailtys, s. thy pilgrimage. T 
nyn droailtys, s. your, &c. pilgrimage, &c. 
T 
troar or troayr, s. f. crop, what comes off the 
land in harvest; pl. -yn; Hag. i. 11: As deïe 
mee son fowan er y thalloo, as er ny sleityn, as 
er yn arroo, as er y feeyn noa, as er yn ooil, as 
er dty chooilley nhee ta’n thalloo dy ymmyrkey, 
as er deiney, as er maase, as er slane troayr y 
thallooin. And I called for a drought upon the 
land, and upon the mountains, and upon the 
corn, and upon the new wine, and upon the oil, 
and upon that which the ground bringeth forth, 
and upon men, and upon cattle, and upon all 
the labour of the hands. 
e hroar or hroayr, s. his crop; pl. -yn. T 
nyn droar or droayr, s. your, &c. crop. T 
trocairys, s. f. justice blended with mercy; 
(tro from treoghe, and cairys, justice), 
such, justice as a widowed person would 
expect; mercy, affection, favourableness; 
Pro. xx. 28: Ta myghin as firrinys coadey yn 
ree as ta e stoyl-reeoil cummit seose liorish 
trocairys. Mercy and truth preserve the king: 
and his throne is upholden by mercy. 
e hrocairys, s. his affection or favour. T 
344 
T 
 
trochoil or trocoil, a. favourable, 
affectionate; Jer. xv. 5: Son quoi vees trocoil 
ort, O Yerusalem? ny quoi nee uss y 
ghobberan? ny quoi hed dy lhiattee dy ênaght 
kys t’ou? For who shall have pity upon thee, O 
Jerusalem? or who shall bemoan thee? or who 
shall go aside to ask how thou doest? 
s’trochoil, a. how favourable or lenient. T 
s’trochoiley, a. id., comp. and sup. T 
ro hrochoil, a. too affectionate or 
favourable. T 
trochoilys, s. See trocairys. 
trog or trogg*, v. lift, rear, train, build; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88; take, Mat. xvii. 27: Ny-yeih, son 
nagh bee comys er ny chur hooin, immee uss 
gys y cheayn, as lhig sheese dooan, as trog y 
chied eeast hig hood: as tra vees oo er vosley 
e veeal, yiow peesh dy argid ayn. 
Notwithstanding, lest we should offend them, 
go thou to the sea, and cast an hook, and take 
up the fish that first cometh up; and when thou 
hast opened his mouth, thou shalt find a piece 
of money, and Pro. xxii. 6: Trog dty lhiannoo 
’sy raad, lhisagh eh goaill: as tra t’eh shenn cha 
jean eh treigeil eh. Train up a child in the way 
he should go: and when he is old, he will not 
depart from it. 
trog-ort, p. arise, arise thou; [1] Chron. 
xxii. 16: Trog ort, er-y-fa shen, as gow er dty 
hoshiaght, as y Chiarn dy row mayrt. Arise 
therefore, and be doing, and the Lord be with 
thee. 
cha drog or drogg*, v. not lift, rear, build, 
raise, train; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 
94. T 
hrog or hrogg*, v. did lift, rear, build, 
train, or raise; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; 
-ys, 94. T 
as hrog ad orroo, and they arose. T 
troggal, v. lifting, rearing, training, 
building; Phrase: troggal y vair veg 
(raising the little finger).  
dy hroggal, v. to lift, rear, build, train, &c. 
T 
er droggal, v. hath, &c. reared, lifted, 
trained, built, or raised. T 
aa-hroggal, v. rebuilding, lifting again. 
troggit, 85. lifted, reared, built, trained. 
s’troggit, a. how lifted, reared, built. T 
ro hroggit, 85. too lifted, reared, &c. T 
troggeyder, s. m. a lifter, founder, &c.; pl. 
-yn. 
er troggilloo or troggloo, a. a lifting; a 
beast is said to be so, when by reason of 
leanness or sickness it cannot rise without 
help; Zech. xi. 16: …trog-yms seose bochilley 
ayns y cheer, nagh jean jeeaghyn lurg ny 
[kirree] cailjey, chamoo shirrey son yn eayn, ny 
lheihys adsyn ta doghanit, ny gymmyrkey lesh 
shen ta er-troggloo. I will raise up a shepherd 
in the land, which shall not visit those that be 
cut off, neither shall seek the young one, nor 
heal that that is broken, nor feed that that 
standeth still. 
e hroggilloo, s. his lifting, &c. T 
troid or troidd*, v. scold, chide, quarrel with 
the tongue; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
cha droid or droidd*, v. not scold; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
hroid or hroidd*, v. did scold or chide; 
-agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
troiddey, v. scolding, chiding; Exod. xvii. 
2: As ren y pobble troiddey rish Moses, as 
dooyrt ad, Cur dooin ushtey dy iu. As dooyrt 
Moses roo, Cre’n-fa ta shiu troiddey rhym’s? 
cre’n-fa ta shiu brasnaghey’n Chiarn? 
Wherefore the people did chide with Moses, 
and said, Give us water that we may drink. And 
Moses said unto them, Why chide ye with me? 
wherefore do ye tempt the Lord?; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn]. 
dy hroiddey, v. to scold or chide. T 
er droiddey, v. hath, &c. scolded. T 
nyn droiddey, s. your, &c. scolding; pl. 67. 
T 
troiddit, 85. scolded, chid, or chode. 
troiddeyder, s. m. a scolder, a termagant. 
e hroiddider, s. his one who scolds. T 
trome, a. heavy, weighty; it is also used to 
express with young, or with child. 
s’trome, a. how heavy or weighty. T  
strimmey, heavier, heaviest, the comp. and 
sup. of s’trome. 
trommey or tromey, a. pl. heavy, weighty, 
grievous; Acts, xxv. 7: As tra v’eh er jeet, 
hass ny Hewnyn haink veih Jerusalem 
345 
T 
 
mygeayrt, as hug ad stiagh ymmodee foiljyn 
tromey gys lieh Phaul, nagh voddagh ad 
prowal. And when he was come, the Jews 
which came down from Jerusalem stood round 
about, and laid many and grievous complaints 
against Paul, which they could not prove. 
ro hrome, a. too heavy or weighty. T 
dromm, a. drowsy, dull, torpid; 90th Psl. 
Manks metre:  
Son ayns dty hilley thousane bleïn 
Cha vel agh myr un laa. 
Ny myr oor ceaut er dromm ny hoie, 
Nagh vel mooar geill ain da. 
[For a thousand years in Thy sight 
Are as but a day. 
Or as an hour spent in the drowsiness of the 
night,  
That we give no great heed to. MWW]. T 
trome-chadlagh, a. drowsy. 
trome-chooisagh, a. important, of great 
weight or consequence. 
trome-torragh, a. big with child. 
trommys, s. f. heaviness. See also trimmid, 
which is employed when any thing having 
weight or heaviness is spoken of; trommys 
for heaviness on the body, dejectedness, 
melancholy, pensiveness; as in the Phrase: 
“çhingys ny trommys” [sickness or 
dejectedness]. 
dy hrommys, s. of heaviness. T 
trimmid, s. m. heaviness, weight. 
e hrimmid, s. his weight or heaviness. T 
nyn drimmid, s. your, &c. weight or 
importance. T 
troo, s. f. envy; pl. -yn or -ghyn. 
troo, v. envy, grudge; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 
83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
hroo, v. did envy or grudge, envied; -agh; 
-in; -ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
trooit, 85. envied, grudged. 
trooder, s. m. an envier; pl. -yn. 
trooagh, a. envious, grudging. 
s’trooagh, a. how envious. T 
s’trooee, a. more envious, most envious. T 
ro hrooagh, a. too envious. T 
trooid, adv. through, from one end or side to 
the other. 
trooid-magh, pre. throughout, quite 
through. 
trooid-taghyrt, adv. accidentally. 
ny hrooid, p. p. through him, throughout; 
-syn, id. em. T 
ny-hrooid, p. p. through him; -syn, id. em. 
troosyn, s. f. trousers, hose. 
nyn drusyn, s. their, &c. trousers. T 
troshagh, a. strong; s. m. a strong creature; 
pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]. See also lajer. 
stroshey, a. stronger, strongest, the comp. 
and sup. of lajer and troshagh. 
ro hroshagh, a. too strong. T 
troshid, s. m. strength, potency, &c. 
e hroshid, s. his strength. T 
nyn droshid, s. your, &c. strength. T 
trost, v. fast, abstain from food; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 
88. 
trosht, v. fast, abstain from food. 
hrosht, v. did fast, fasted; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
trostey, v. fasting, abstaining;  
dy hroshtey, v. to fast. T 
ry-hrostey, v. to be fasting. 
trostey, s. m. a fast; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
nyn drostey, s. our, &c. fasting. T 
trostee, a. d. of a fast or fasting. 
trostit, 85. fasted. Not used. 
troshtagh, a. 
s’troshtagh, a. how much for fasting. 
s’troshtee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. 
troshtagh, s. 
e hroshtagh, s. his faster; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee]. T 
trosteyder, s. m. a faster; pl. -yn. 
trouise, s. f. trash, trumpery, rubbish; pl. 69 
[change -e to -yn]. 
e hrouse, s. his rubbish. T 
nyn drouse, s. their, &c. rubbish. T 
troyt, v. trot; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
troytit, 85. trotted. 
troyteyder, s. m. a trotter; pl. -yn. 
trubbyl, s. trouble; Luke, viii. 49: Choud as 
v’eh foast loayrt, haink fer veih thie fer-reill yn 
synagogue, gra rish, Ta dty inneen marroo; ny 
cur trubbyl sodjey da’n Vainshter. While he yet 
spake, there cometh one from the ruler of the 
346 
T 
 
synagogue’s house, saying to him, Thy 
daughter is dead; trouble not the Master. 
trughanagh, s. m. one who murmurs, a 
murmurer; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee]. 
trughanagh, v. murmuring, grumbling. 
trughaney, v. murmuring, complaining. 
trughanys, s. f. murmur, grumble. 
trustyr, s. f. dirt, filth, nast; pl. -yn. 
e hrustyr, s. his filth, dirt, or nast. T 
nyn drustyr, s. your, &c. dirt. T 
trustyragh, a. dirty, filthy. See broigh. 
trutlag, s. f. a starling; pl. -yn. 
try, v. attempt, try; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
tryal, a. the mill-stone grit is so called. Clagh 
tryal. 
tuarystal, s. f. the shape and carriage of the 
body, the form or appearance; Ez. x. 2[2]: 
As va cummey ny eddinyn oc co-chaslys ny 
eddinyn shen honnick mee liorish awin Chebar, 
yn tuarystal oc as ad-hene: hie ad dy chooilley 
unnane jeeragh er nyn doshiaght. And the 
likeness of their faces was the same faces 
which I saw by the river of Chebar, their 
appearances and themselves: they went every 
one straight forward; the fashion; Ez. xliii. 
11: As my t’ad goaill nearey son ooilley ny t’ad 
er n’yannoo, jeeagh daue cummey yn thie, as y 
tuarystal echey, as ny raaidyn echey stiagh, as 
ny raaidyn echey magh, as dy chooilley 
chummey jeh, as ooilley ny oardaghyn echey, 
as ooilley ny slattyssyn echey as ooilley ny 
leighyn echey: as scrieu sheese eh ’sy chilley 
ocsyn, dauesyn dy reayll yn slane oardaghey 
jeh, as ooilley ny slattyssyn echey, as ad y 
chooilleeney. And if they be ashamed of all that 
they have done, shew them the form of the 
house, and the fashion thereof, and the goings 
out thereof, and the comings in thereof, and all 
the forms thereof, and all the ordinances 
thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the 
laws thereof: and write it in their sight, that they 
may keep the whole form thereof, and all the 
ordinances thereof, and do them; the 
resemblance; pl. -yn. 
e huarystal, s. his shape, resemblance, 
comparison; Isa. xlvi. 5: Quoi gys nee shiu 
mee y hoylaghey, as m’y chormal, as jannoo 
my huarystal, shin dy ve co-laik? To whom will 
ye liken me, and make me equal, and compare 
me, that we may be like? T 
nyn duarystal, s. your, &c. shape, 
resemblance, or picture. T 
gless-huarystal, s. [f.] a looking-glass, a 
mirror. 
tubbag, s. f. a tub, a bushel or measure of 
four pecks; pl. -yn. 
e hubbag, s. his tub or bushel. Prov. “T’ou 
towse e arroo liorish dty hubbag hene.” 
[You are measuring his corn with your own 
bushel.] T 
tuig, s. f. a twig; pl. -yn. 
tuig-y-yeeigey, s. f. the twig of the ditch, 
called or corrupted by some to treebey-
yeeigey, the twig of sallix or sally that 
grows spontaneously in marshy places. 
tuinney, s. m. the universe; Gael. 
e huinney, s. his universe. T 
tuitt, v. fall; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83, -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
cha duitt, v. not fall; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym 
-yms, 94. T 
huitt, v. did fall, fell, devolved; -agh; -in; 
-ins; -ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
tuittym, v. falling. 
dy huittym, v. to fall, devolve, drop. T 
er duittym, hath, &c. fell or fallen. T 
tuittym-magh, v. falling out, quarrelling. 
tuittym neeal, v. falling lifeless; [L]am. ii. 
11: Ta my hooillyn moal lesh jeïr; ta my chree 
seaghnit, ta my aane er ny gheayrtey magh er 
y thalloo, er coontey toyrt-mow inneen my 
phobble, er-yn-oyr dy vel yn chloan as ny 
oikanyn tuittym neeal ayns straïdyn yn ard-
valley. Mine eyes do fail with tears, my bowels 
are troubled, my liver is poured upon the earth, 
for the destruction of the daughter of my 
people; because the children and the sucklings 
swoon in the streets of the city; swooning or 
fainting. 
tuittym, s. m. a fall; pl. -yn. 
tuitteyder, s. m. one who falls; pl. -yn. 
tuitteyder-magh, s. m. one who quarrels. 
tuittymagh, a. d. of falling, incident to 
falling. 
347 
T 
 
tullagh, s. f. an instant; pl. 72 [change -agh to 
-eeyn]. 
e hullagh, s. his instant. T 
tullaghtagh, a. instantaneous. 
tun, v. draw ale off in casks; -agh, 77; -ee, 
80; -in, 83 ; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. 
hunn, v. did tun, tunned; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms; -ys, 94. T 
thunney, v. tunning. 
tunney, v. filling casks with ale or beer. 
dy hunney, v. to tun. T 
thunnit, 85. tunned, inured. 
ro hunnit, 85. too inured, too tunned. T 
turneir or turneyr, s. m. an attorney; pl. -yn. 
turneiragh, a. d. of an attorney. 
turneirys, s. f. attorneyship, the practice of 
an attorney; pl. -syn. 
tushtey, s. m. knowledge; pl. 67 [change -ey 
to -aghyn]. 
dy hushtey, s. of knowledge. T 
nyn dushtey, s. your, &c. knowledge. T 
mee[-]hushtey, s. want or lack of 
knowledge. T 
meehushtey, s. m. want or lack of 
knowledge, ignorance. 
tushtagh, a. knowing, having knowledge; 
s. m. a knowing one; pl. 71 [change -agh to 
-ee]. 
s’tushtagh, a. how knowing or versed in 
knowledge. T 
s’tushtee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. T 
mee[-]hushtagh, a. without knowledge. T 
mee[-]hushtee, s. ignorant people. T 
neu-hushtagh, a. foolishly; 1 Chron. xxi. 
8: …agh nish gueeym ort, gow ersooyl peccah 
dty harvaant, son ta mee er n’yannoo dy feer 
neu-hushtagh. …but now, I beseech thee, do 
away the iniquity of thy servant; for I have done 
very foolishly.  
ooilley-tushtagh, a. all-knowing, 
omniscious. 
slane tushtagh, a. perfect knowledge. 
yn voal hushtagh, s. the person having no 
great share of knowledge, a fool; Prov. 
xxix. 20: Vel oo cur-my-ner dooinney ta 
siyragh ayns e ghoan? ta caslys share jeh’n 
voal-hushtagh na jehsyn. Seest thou a man 
that is hasty in his words? there is more hope 
of a fool than of him. M 
tutler, s. m. a tattler, a tale bearer; pl. -yn. 
tutleragh or tutleraght, v. tattling, tale 
bearing. 
tutlerys, s. f. the practice of tale bearing. 
twoaie, s. ‘vigilance, caution’ 
cur twoaie, v. beware, take heed. 
cur-twoaie, v. beware, be aware. 
er twoaie, a. aware, vigilant. 
er-dty-hwoaie, adv. on thy look out, on thy 
aware or alert. 
bee dty hwoaie, adv. beware thou, be thou 
cautious. T 
[er nyn] dwoaie, a. aware; as, bee-jee er 
nyn dwoaie (beware ye, or be ye aware); 
Mat. vii. 15: Bee-jee er nyn dwoaie jeh 
phadeyryn foalsey, ta cheet hiu ayns coamrey 
keyrragh, agh cheu-sthie t’ad nyn moddee-
oaldey jollyssagh. Beware of false prophets, 
which come to you in sheep’s clothing, but 
inwardly they are ravening wolves; Col. ii. 8: 
Bee-jee er nyn dwoaie nagh gow dooinney 
erbee vondeish erriu trooid ynsagh foalsey as 
molteyraght, lurg cliaghtaghyn deiney, lurg 
ynsagh annoon y theihll, as cha nee lurg 
Creest. Beware lest any man spoil you through 
philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of 
men, after the rudiments of the world, and not 
after Christ. 
twoaiagh, a. aware of, apprehensive, 
cautious, on the look out. 
neu-hwoaiagh, a. unwary, incautious. 
twoaie, s. f. north. 
twoaie sheear hwoaie, s. north northwest. 
twoaie as gys y sheear, s. north and by 
west. 
twoaie shiar hwoaie, s. north northeast. 
my hwoaie, a. northward. T 
my-hwoaie, a. northward, to the north. 
goll-twoaie, s. m. a rainbow; pl. -yn. 
348 
U 
 
U 
As a radical initial, is like the other vowels in 
the Manks language. See Remarks. 
udlan, s. f. a swivel; pl. -yn. 
ugh or ogh, an interjection of disappointment, 
frustration, or defeat. 
ogh or och. See ugh.  
ugh cha nee, in. Dr. Kelly in his Manks 
grammer says the meaning is “wo is me.” 
ugh choin she, in. O that it is. 
ughtagh, s. f. ascent, acclivity, a rising 
ground; pl. 72 [change -agh to -eeyn]. 
ughtee, a. d. of ascent or acclivity. 
uhllin, s. a stack-yard or hagyard. 
uhlley, a. d. of the stack-yard or hagyard. 
uillin, s. f. elbow. Prov. “Sniessey yn uillin na 
yn doarn.” [Nearer is the elbow than the 
fist.] 
uiljyn, s. pl. elbows. 
e huillin, s. her elbow. U 
sy n’uillin, s. in the elbow. U  
guilliney, v. 61. elbowing. U 
uinnag, s. f. a window; pl. -yn. 
sy n’uinnag, in the window. U 
uinnag-chlea, s. f. a sky-light or literally a 
roof-light. 
far-uinnag, s. f. a false window, an 
imitation of one, a recess in a wall. 
ullaagagh, s. f. woodbine, honeysuckle. 
ullee, a. conversant; Ec[clesiasticus]. xxxix. 
3: Shirree eh magh folliaghtyn raaghyn-
creeney, as bee eh ullee ayns coraaghyn-
dorraghey. He will seek out the secrets of grave 
sentences, and be conversant in dark parables; 
ready, prepared; Matt. xxii. 4: Cur-my-ner ta 
mee er n'aarlaghey my yinnair: ta my ghew as 
my veiyn beiyht marroo, as dy chooilley nhee 
ullee; tar-jee gys y vannish. Behold, I have 
prepared my dinner: my oxen and my fatlings 
are killed, and all things are ready: come unto 
the marriage; [xxiv.] 44: Shen-y-fa bee-jee 
shiuish myrgeddin ullee: son ec lheid yn oor as 
nagh vel shiu smooinaghtyn er, hig yn Mac 
dooinney. Therefore be ye also ready: for in 
such an hour as ye think not the Son of man 
cometh. 
ullymar, s. f. wormwood; pl. -yn.  
un, a. one. Un is only part of the word 
unnane (one); un is always used before 
substantives; as, un laa (one day); un red 
(one thing), &c.; but the whole word 
unnane, or the latter syllable nane, is used 
before other words.  
unnane, s. f. one. This word is not made 
use of before substantives as it is a 
substantive itself. See un and nane.  
nane. s. f. and a. one; a contraction or part 
of the word unnane, what is used in 
familiar talk; pl. -yn. U  
breck-sy-nane, s. f. spots or freckles on the 
skin, caused by the heat of the sun. 
unnanejeig, a. eleven.  
annanjeig. See unnanjeig.  
nane jeig, a. eleven. U  
nane jeig as feed, a. thirty-one. U  
nane jeigoo, s. eleventh. U  
unnaneys, s. f. unity, union. 
unnaneysagh, a. in unition, 
unnaneysey, v. uniting, to unite. 
unnaneysit, 85. united.  
undaagagh, s. f. nettles. 
undin, s. m. foundation, basis; pl. -yn. 
e hundin, s. her foundation. U 
undinagh, a. fundamental. 
unjin, s. m. ash, [t]eil; Isa. vi. 13: …myr bun 
billey-unjin ny darragh, ta'n soo oc ayndoo, tra 
t'ad tilgey nyn ghuillagyn, shen myr vees yn 
sluight chrauee ayns y bun echey. …as a teil 
tree, and as an oak, whose substance is in 
them, when they cast their leaves: so the holy 
seed shall be the substance thereof. 
unjinagh, a. d. ashen, of ash. 
unnish, s. f. an onion; pl. -yn. 
e hunnish, s. her onion; pl. -yn. U 
bog-unnish, s. f. the herb osmondroyal or 
water-fern. 
far-unnish, s. f. a scallion; pl. -yn. 
urley, s. m. an eagle. 
urlee, s. pl. eagles. 
e hurley, s. her eagle. U 
urrys [? ‘surprise’] 
surrys 
surrys-enn, adv. allowed to be well 
known. [??] 
349 
U 
 
burrys  
b[’]urrys-enn, adv. See baashiagh-enn. 
[‘easy to know or well known.’] 
cha burrys lhiam da jannoo eh, 161. I am 
not surprised at his doing it.  
cha vurrys lhiam da. See radical burrys. B 
nurrys 
cha nurrys, adv. need not be surprised. 
cha nyrrys, v. not wonder. Y  
use, s. m. interest; pl. -yn. 
ushag, s. f. a bird; pl. -yn. Prov. “Ta ushag 
ayns laue chammah as jees sy thammag.” 
[A bird is the hand is as good as two in the 
bush.] 
ushag happagh, s. f. the lark or tuft bird. 
ushag reaisht or reeast, s. f. the mountain 
plover. 
ushag roauyr ny hoarn, s. f. the bunting. 
ushag voltee, s. f. the wagtail. 
ushag wee, s. f. the yellow hammer. 
edd-ushag, s. m. a bird's nest. 
ushtey, s. m. water; pl. 67 [change -ey to 
-aghyn]. 
ny hushtey, s. of water. U 
ushtey-bio. See bioghey roayrt [s. m. the 
first rising of the spring tide after a neap.] 
guilley-ny-ushtey, s. m. the smallest of the 
young at a litter or birth. 
kiark ushtey, s. f. a coot. 
lhieggey-ushtey, s. m. a waterfall, a 
cataract. 
moir-ny-ushtaghyn, s. f. a source of the 
waters; 2 Kings, ii. 21: As hie eh magh gys 
moir ny ushtaghyn, as hilg eh yn sollan ayns 
shen. And he went forth unto the spring of the 
waters, and cast the salt in there. 
mwyllin ushtey, s. f. a water mill. 
tarroo-ushtey, s. m. a nondescript animal. 
usht or ushtee, v. water, moisten, wet; 
-agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; 
-yms, 87; -ys, 88..  
cha n’usht or n’ushtee, v. not water; -agh; 
-ee; -in; -ym; -yms, 94. U  
dushtee, v. watered, did water. U. 
gushtagh or gushtaghey, v. 61. watering. 
U 
dy ushtagh or ushtaghey, v. to water, to 
steep in water. 
er n’ushtaghey, v. hath, &c. watered. U  
ushtit, 85. watered, steeped. 
ushteyder, s. m. a waterer; pl. -yn. 
ushlagh, a. watery, wet. 
s’ushlagh or sushtlagh, a. how watery. U 
s’ushlee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. U 
ushylagh, s. m. a very light and weak 
person, a mere skeleton. 
uss, pro. thee; the em. of oo. 
350 
V 
 
V 
V, as a radical initial, see 32; mostly all words 
under it come from b, f, and m, only some 
of which are shown.  
veyge 
yn veyge, s. the voyage; Acts, xxvii. 10: 
Gheiney vie, ta mee cur tastey dy bee 
yn veyge shoh lesh mooarane coayl as assee, 
cha nee ynrycan jeh'n lught as y lhong, agh 
myrgeddin jeh nyn mioys. Sirs, I perceive that 
this voyage will be with hurt and much damage, 
not only of the lading and ship, but also of our 
lives. 
vaidjin, adv. a while since, a while ago, just 
now past. 
veih, p. p. from, from him; -syn, id. em.  
voish, pre. from. 
woish, pre. from. Prov. “Woish y laue gys 
y veeal” (from hand to mouth). V  
cre veih, adv. whence, where from.  
veih my cheilley, adv. asunder.  
veih shid, adv. from thence.  
veih shoh, adv. hence, from hence.  
voish, p. p. from him; -yn, id. em. 
woish, p. p. from him; -yn, id. em. V  
vo-ee, p. p. from her; -ish, id. em. 
voue, p. p. from them; -syn, id. em. 
woue, p. p. from them; -syn, id. em. V  
woue hene, p. p. from themselves. V  
voym, p. p. from me; -s, id. em. 
wooym, p. p. from me; -s. id. em. V  
wooympene, p. p. from myself. V  
voin, p. p. from us; -yn, id. em.  
wooin, p. p. from us; -yn, id. em. V  
wooinhene, p. from ourselves. V  
void, p. p. from thee; -s, id. em. 
veue, p. p. from you or ye; -ish, id. em. 
weue, p. p. from you; -ish, id. em. See 
veue. V  
weue-hene, p. p. from yourselves. V  
magh-voish, pre. except, without, 
exclusive. 
venee, s. inherent propensity; a low word. 
ventr, v. did venture or ventured; -agh; 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88. 
dy ventreil, v. to venture. 
yn ventyr, s. the venture; pl. -yn.  
vest, s. f. a waistcoat.  
vondeish, s. advantage, profit; pl. -yn.  
wondeish (sic: stress), s. advantage, profit. 
V  
neu-vondeish, s. f. disadvantage. 
vondeishagh, a. advantageous, profitable. 
wondeishsagh, a. advantageous, profitable. 
V 
s’vondeishagh, a. how advantageous. V 
s’vondeishee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. 
V 
351 
W 
 
W 
This letter, as primary initial, is seen in the 
following columns, and also as initial in 
derivatives where it is second letter, or where 
oo, u and sometimes o are next after primary 
mutable initials in a word.  
Note. — The derivatives from v are only used 
in common conversation, and not in sacred 
or solemn language.  
wagaan, v. stroll idly.  
wagaantagh, s. m. a vagrant or vagabond; 
a. in a vagabond, vagrant manner.  
s’waggaantagh, a. how vagabond or 
vagrant. 
s’waggaantee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. 
W 
wagaantys, s. vagrancy.  
wahll, in. well.  
walk, v. tuck or mill woollen cloth; -agh, 77; 
-ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; 
-ys, 88.  
walkey, v. tucking, milling.  
walkee, a. d. of tucking or milling.  
mwyllin walkee, s. f. a tuck mill. 
walkit, pt. tucked, milled.  
s’walkit, a. how tucked. W 
neu-walkit, a. untucked, unmilled. 
walkeyder or walker, s. a tucker or miller 
of woollen cloth, a fuller; Mark, ix. 3: As 
haink y coamrey echey dy ve sollys, erskyn 
towse gial myr y sniaghtey; nagh row walker er 
y thalloo oddagh jannoo cha gial roo. And his 
raiment became shining, exceeding white as 
snow; so as no fuller on earth can white them.  
wandrail, v. wandering.  
wandrailagh, a. wandering; s. m. a person 
that wanders.  
wandrailyssyn, s. pl. wanderings. 
wappin, s. m. a weapon; pl. -yn.  
wappinagh, a. having weapons.  
war, s. m. the stroke of an oar in rowing or 
plying; pl. -yn.  
wardoonagh, s. a. a warden; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee].  
wardoor, s. m. a jailor; pl. -yn; Acts, xvi. 23: 
As tra v’ad er woalley ad dy dewil, hilg ad ad 
ayns pryssoon, as doardee ad yn wardoor dy 
reayll ad dy sauchey. And when they had laid 
many stripes upon them, they cast them into 
prison, charging the jailor to keep them safely.  
warp, s. m. a cast, a three; pl. -pyn.  
warp, v. wrap, bind round; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88. 
warpal, v. wrapping, binding round.  
warpit, pt. wrapped, bound.  
warrag, s. f. m. a wit; pl. -yn.  
warree, a. witty, crafty, &c.  
s’warree, how witty, crafty or cunning; 
comp. and sup. W 
wass, adv. below, down. It is sometimes used 
in opposition to hoal; any where the 
speaker is; ayns shoh wass (here below). 
wed, s. m. wad or wadding.  
whaal or whayll, v. sew; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha n’whaal, v. not sew; -agh, &c. W  
dwhaayl, v. did sew, sewed; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms, 94. W. 
whaaley, v. sewing. 
dy waaley, v. to sew. 
dy oaley, to sew. Perhaps this word ought 
to be written aaley. W 
er n’whaaley, v. hath, &c. sewed. W  
whaalt, pt. sewed. 
s’whaaylt or s’whaalt, a. how sewed. W 
neu-whaalt, a. unsewed. 
whaaley, s. m. a sewing or seam; pl. 67 
[change -ey to -aghyn].  
whaaleyder, s. m. one who sews.  
whaalley, s. m. a clinch nail; pl. 67 [change 
-ey to -aghyn].  
wheddyr, s. f. a barb; pl. -yn.  
wheddyragh, a. barby, having barbs.  
wheesh, adv. as much, so much; cre wheesh, 
cre whillin, (how much). 
ayns-wheesh, conj. inasmuch, insomuch. 
cre-wheesh, a. how big or how great. 
whilleen, or as it is always pronounced  
whillin or whyllin, adv. as many, so many; 
(how many). 
cre-whelleen, a. how many. The ee in the 
last syllable is to be sounded as i. 
whoig or whaig, s. f. a thrum; pl. -yn. 
352 
W 
 
whush, in. hold thy peace, hush. 
wistad, s. f. worsted. 
woishleeyn, s. pl. pennyworts.  
wollad, s. a wallet.  
wor, v. This word is used to make a horse go 
off to the right, to chee or gee.  
353 
Y 
 
Y 
Y, as a radical initial, does not change, but all 
words radically in j come under it.  
y, (article) the contraction of yn. It is often 
used before words beginning with a 
consonant; as, y dooinney, (the man); goll 
gys y vagher, (going to the field), &c. It is 
sometimes used in composition for a, as in 
Luke, ix. 3. Ny lhig da daa chooat y pheesh 
y ve eu. [Neither have two coats apiece.] 
yagh, in. anon; said to the speaker when the 
hearer does not well know what is said, a 
notice to repeat what was said before. 
yah or yagh, s. lass; pl. -yn. 
yarnaig, s. f. a hank of yarn or thread; pl. -yn.  
yeeal, s. f. a thong, a string of hide; Acts, xxii. 
25: As myr v’ad dy chiangley eh lesh yeeallyn, 
dooyrt Paul rish y chaptan-keead va ny hassoo 
liorish, Vel eh lowal diuish dy scuitchal 
dooinney ta ny Romanagh as gyn deyrey? And 
as they bound him with thongs, Paul said unto 
the centurion that stood by, Is it lawful for you 
to scourge a man that is a Roman, and 
uncondemned?  
yeal. See yeeal.  
yeeal-chassee, s. f. a piece of thong tied 
between the handle and the rod of a flail, 
whereon it works.  
yeeal, v. beat; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 
84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
cha n’eeall, v. not beat; -agh; -ee; -in; -ins; 
-ym; -yms, 94. Y  
deeal, v. 8. did beat, beat or bet. Y. 
yeealley, v. beating. 
geealley, v. 61. beating. Though the radical 
of this word is in y, as yeeall, the y is cast 
away and it seems to come from e. 
er n’eealley, v. hath, &c. beaten. Y 
yeealt, 85. beaten.  
yeealley, s. m. a beating; pl. 67 [change -ey 
to -aghyn].  
yeealleyder, s. m. a beater.  
yeeilley ‘satiety’ 
nyn neeilley, <v>[s]. their &c. eating Pro. i. 
31. Shen-y-fa nee ad gee jeh mess y raad oc 
hene, as bee nyn neeilley oc jeh nyn groutyn 
hene. Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of 
their own way, and be filled with their own 
devices. E 
Yeesey, s. m. Jesus.  
Yernagh, s. m. an Irishman; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee]; a. Irish, any thing Irish.  
y Nernagh, s. the Irishman. Y 
Yernish, s. f. the Irish language. 
yiarn, s. m. iron; pl. -yn. 
sy n’yiarn, s. in the iron. Y  
yiarn-foldyragh, s. f. a scythe or sithe.  
yiarn-giarree, a. an edged tool.  
lhoob-yiarn, s. m. a link. 
yiarn, v. iron; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; 
-ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
dy yiarnal or yiarney, v. to iron.  
er n’yiarney, v. hath, &c. ironed, 
smoothed. Y 
yiarnit, 85. ironed, finished with iron.  
s’yiarnit, a. how ironed, or covered with 
iron. Y 
yindys, s. m. wonder, admiration, amazement; 
pl. -syn.  
goaill-yindys, v. wondering. See also 
gindys. 
yindyssagh, a. wonderful, wonderous; a. 
m. a wonderer; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
s’yindyssagh, a. how wonderful or 
wonderous. 
s’yindyssee, a. id., comp. and sup. Y 
dy yindyssagh, adv. wonderfully, &c.  
shilley-yindyssagh, s. m. spectacle; 1 Cor. 
iv. 9: Son ta shinyn shilley yindyssagh da’n 
seihll, as da ainleyn, as da deiney. For we are 
made a spectacle unto the world, and to 
angels, and to men. 
gindys, v. 61. wondering; Psl. xxii. 17: 
Hoyll ad my laueyn as my chassyn: foddym 
ooilley my chraueyn y choontey: t’ad shassoo 
gindys as jeeaghyn orrym. They pierced my 
hands and my feet; I may tell all my bones: they 
stand staring and looking upon me. Y 
yioyn 
nyn yioïn or yioyn, s. their, &c. knowing or 
knowledge; Isa. lvii. 9: Hie oo gys y ree lesh 
dty ooillyn millish as lesh ymmodee dty spiceyn 
costal, as hug oo dty haghteryn foddey ’sy 
yioyn, as ren oo ginjillaghey oo hene dy jarroo 
gys joan ny hooirey. And thou wentest to the 
354 
Y 
 
king with ointment, and didst increase thy 
perfumes, and didst send thy messengers far 
off, and didst debase thyself even unto hell; 
their, &c. purpose; Acts, xxvii. 13: As 
feaysley lesh geay meeley jiass sheiltyn dy row 
oc nish nyn yioïn, hiauill ad ry lhiattee Crete. 
And when the south wind blew softly, 
supposing that they had obtained their purpose, 
loosing thence, they sailed close by Crete.  
jeh yioïn, adv. knowingly.  
yoin. See yioyn; Pro. xxiv. 28: Ny bee 
feanish noi dty naboo jeh dty yoïn, as ny jean 
foalsaght lesh dty veillyn. Be not a witness 
against thy neighbour without cause; and 
deceive not with thy lips.  
shione, v. do or doth know. 
cha nhione or nione, v. know not. Prov. 
Share yn olk shione dooin, na yn olk nagh 
nhione dooin. [Better the evil that we know 
than the evil which we know not.] S  
narra noain dhyt, adv. may it not 
otherwise be known to thee, or may it 
inevitably, of necessity, or fate come on or 
to thee. [sc. nhione ?] 
bione, v. knew, did know, the past tense of 
shione.  
yll or yllee, v. shout, cry out, exclaim, call; 
-agh, 77; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
dyll or dyllee, v. called or did call, did visit 
or name. Y. 
gyllagh, v. 61. shouting, calling. Prov. “Yn 
oghe gyllagh toyn losht da’n aiee.” [The 
oven calling burnt bottom to the kiln] 
gillagh. See gyllagh. 
dy yllagh, v. to call, to shout or cry out.  
er yllaghey (sic), v. hath, &c., called, &c.  
yllit, 85. called, shouted for. 
s’yllit, a. how called, or shouted to. Y 
neu-yllit, a. uncalled. 
yllagh, s. m. a call or shout; pl. -yn. 
ylleyder, s. m. a caller, shouter, exclaimer.  
ymmodee, a. many, great many.  
ymmyd, s. m. use; pl. -yn.  
ass-ymmyd, a. out of use, obsolete. 
ny hymmydyn, s. the uses. Y 
ymmydey, v. using.  
ymmydit, 85. used.  
ymmydagh or ymmydoil (sic: stress), a. 
useful. 
s’ymmydagh, a. how useful. Y 
neu-ymmydagh, or neu-ymmydoil (sic: 
stress), a. unuseful, useless. 
ymmydoilid or ymmydys, s. f. usefulness.  
ymmylt. See ymmilt.  
ymmilt or ymmylt, v. tumble or roll, as a 
horse does after work; -agh, 77; -ee, 80; 
-in, 83 -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 87; -ys, 88.  
dymmylt, v. did tumble or roll as a horse. 
Y. 
gymmilt or gymmiltey, v. 61. rolling or 
tumbling as a horse will after work, 
wallowing; <2 Pet. ii. 22.> [See ymmylt, s.] 
Y 
dy ymmyltey, v. to roll, tumble or wallow.  
ymmyltit, 85. rolled, tumbled, wallowed.  
ymmylt, s. ‘wallowing’; [2 Pet. ii. 22: Ta’n 
moddey er jyndaa reesht gys y skeeah echey 
hene; as y vuc va nieet, gys yn ymmylt eck ’sy 
laagh. The dog is turned to his own vomit 
again; and the sow that was washed to her 
wallowing in the mire.] 
ymmyltagh, s. m. a tumbler or roller; pl. 71 
[change -agh to -ee].  
ymmyrçh, s. f. need, necessity; pl. -yn.  
gymmyrçh, v. [be] in need or necessity. Y 
ymmyrçhagh, a. needful, necessary; s. m. 
a necessitous person; pl. 71 [change -agh to 
-ee].  
s’ymmyrçhagh, a. how needful, necessary. 
Y 
s’ymmyrçhee, a. id., [comp. and sup.,] 58. 
Y 
neu-ymmyrçhagh, a. unnecessary, 
needless. 
ymmyrk, v. bear, bear with, behave; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
cha n’ymmyrk, v. not bear; -agh; -in; -ins; 
-ym -yms, 94. Y  
dymmyrk, v. bore or did bear, sustain, or 
testify. 
gymmyrkey, v. bearing, bearing up, 
bringing forth, behaving, sustaining. Y 
dy ymmyrkey, v. to bear, to bear up, to 
bring forth, to carry, sustain, behave, &c. 
er n’ymmyrkey, v. hath, &c. borne. 
ymmyrkit, 85. borne, sustained, supported, 
355 
Y 
 
carried, &c.  
s’ymmyrkit, a. how borne or sustained. Y 
neu-ymmyrkit, a. unborne. 
ymmyrkey, s. a birth. Job, iii. 16: Er-
nonney follit myr ymmyrkey roish y traa cha 
beign ayn; myr mwaneyn nagh vaik rieau y 
toilshey. Or as an hidden untimely birth I had 
not been; as infants which never saw light; pl. 
67 [change -ey to -aghyn].  
ymmyrt, v. row with oars; -agh, 77; &c. -ys, 
88.  
dymmyrt, v. did row with oar, rowed. Y 
gymmyrt, v. 61. rowing, rowing with oars. 
Y 
ymmyrtit, 85. rowed. 
ymmyrtagh, s. m. a rower; pl. 71 [change 
-agh to -ee].  
yndyr, v. graze, browse, feed on grass; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
gyndyr, v. 61. grazing, browsing, feeding 
on grass. Y 
dy yndyr, v. to feed on grass, to graze.  
yndyrit, 85. grass eaten, grazed. 
yndyragh, s. m. one that grazes, a grazier; 
pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
ynnyd, s. f. a stead, impression, place, station, 
site, vestige; pl. -yn.  
ass-ynnyd, adv. out of place, out of joint. 
ayns ynnyd, adv. in lieu, place, stead of, in 
joint.  
syn-ynnyd, adv. in lieu of, instead, in place 
of. 
ynnyd-veaghee, s. f. a dwelling place.  
ynnyd y vreck, s. f. the marks of the small 
pox.  
ynnydagh, a. having impressions, marks of 
what had been, local.  
ynrican, a. only, onely or one like. This word 
would have been more analogous had it 
been spelled unrican.  
unrick, a. only. This orthography is used in 
the Manks Hymn Book, hymn cxlviii. 3, 
and [is] perhaps more analogous. 
Uss, unrick, uss, baillym ve aym, 
Treig-ym yn seihll as shen ny t’aym. 
Cur dou oo hene, cur oo hene dou, 
Roish nhee dy vel ayns shoh ny niau. 
[Thee alone, thee, I would wish with me, 
I will abandon the world and that which I have. 
Give Thyself to me, give me Thyself, 
Before a thing to be here or heaven. MWW] 
See ynrican.  
ynrick, a. (from un, one, and rick, settled 
rule); sincere, upright, just, perfect; 1 
Chron. xxix. 9: Eisht va’n pobble ayns ard 
voggey son feoiltys nyn jebballyn, er-yn-oyr 
lesh cree ynrick, dy ren ad chebbal dy 
arryltagh gys y Chiarn. Then the people 
rejoiced, for that they offered willingly, because 
with perfect heart they offered willingly to the 
Lord; dooinney ynrick, (a man of one settled 
rule in any thing good).  
s’ynrick, a. how sincere, candid, upright, 
or just, comp. and sup. Y 
neu-ynrick, a. insincere, unrighteous, 
unjust. 
slane-ynrick, a. perfect; Job, i. 1: Va 
dooinney ayns cheer Uz, va’n ennym echey 
Job; as va’n dooinney cheddin slane-ynrick as 
jeeragh, goaill aggle roish Jee, as shaghney 
olk. There was a man in the land of Uz, whose 
name was Job; and that man was perfect and 
upright, and one that feared God, and 
eschewed evil. 
ynrickys, s. f. sincerity, uprightness, 
integrity, righteousness, truth.  
yns* or ynsee, v. learn, teach, instruct; -agh, 
77; -ee, 80; -in, 83; -ins, 84; -ym, 86; -yms, 
87; -ys, 88.  
cha n’yns or n’ynsee, v. not learn, not 
teach; -agh; -in; -ins; -ym; -yms, 94. Y  
dynsee, v. taught, did teach, learned or did 
learn, did gain, or impart knowledge. Y.  
gynsagh or gynsaghey, v. 61. teaching, 
learning. Y 
dy ynsaghey, v. to learn, to teach, to 
instruct, to receive instruction.  
er m’ynsaghey (sic), v. hath, &c. been 
taught.  
er n’ynsaghey, pt. hath, &c. learned, 
taught. Y 
ynsit, 85. learned, taught. 
s’ynsit, a. how learned, taught, instructed, 
or educated. Y 
dy ynsit, adv. learnedly.  
neu-ynsit, a. unlearned, untaught, illiterate. 
slane-ynsit, a. perfect; Isa. xlii. 19: Quoi ta 
356 
Y 
 
cha doal rishyn ta slane ynsit, cha moal ayns 
soilshey as shirveishagh y Chiarn? Who is blind 
as he that is perfect, and blind as the Lord’s 
servant? 
ynseydagh, s. m. a learner, a pupil, a 
scholar; pl. 71 [change -agh to -ee].  
ynseyder, s. m. a teacher; pl. -yn.  
ynsagh, s. m. learning, literature, erudition, 
instruction, doctrine; pl. -yn.  
ynsee, a. d. of learning or teaching.  
fer ynsee, s. m. a teacher, a taught person.  
fer-ynsee, s. m. a teacher.  
e er-ynsee, s. his teacher, mas. F 
fir ynsee, s. pl. teachers, taught persons.  
fir-ynsee, s. pl. teachers, instructers. 
ynsagh-lioaragh, s. m. book learning, the 
use of letters, in contradistinction to the 
learning of any thing else.  
ynsagh-keayin, s. [m]. navigation.  
ynsoil, a. teachable, able to learn.  
yskan, s. an ell; pl. -yn.  
yskid, s. shank or hough; 2 Sam. viii. 4: …as 
yiare David feh-yskid ooilley ny cabbil fainee, 
agh haue eh keead jeu son whilleen fainagh. 
…and David houghed all the chariot horses, but 
reserved of them for an hundred chariots; 
Josh. xi. 9: As ren Joshua roo myr doardee yn 
Chiarn da: yiare eh feh yskid nyn gabbil, as 
losht eh nyn vainee lesh aile. And Joshua did 
unto them as the Lord bade him: he houghed 
their horses, and burnt their chariots with fire); 
the part an animal has below the trunk of 
the body; pl. -yn; yskidyn liau[y]rey (long 
shanks). 
 
