Bun as Bree 2
© Christopher Lewin 2011
Christopher Lewin
No. 2 - May 2011
A series of short articles on Manx Gaelic grammar, idiom, vocabulary
and pronunciation.
These little pieces, which I intend to produce every month, are aimed at intermediate-
advanced learners of Manx Gaelic and everyone who has an interest in the quirks of
the Manx language. Some of the things I will mention will be familiar to many
people, some to a few people, and some perhaps will not be widely known. I hope
these articles will be interesting, and please let me know if what I say is incorrect, or
if I have omitted something relevant.
The trouble with anchasley
One word that is impossible to avoid hearing and reading in today’s Manx is
anchasley ‘different’. But where does it come from? And are there better and more
idiomatic ways of saying talking about ‘difference’?
I have long had reservations about the word anchasley, and these are the reasons why:
- It doesn’t occur (so far as I know) in classical, literary Manx; at any rate it is
not usual.
- an- is not a very common prefix (though it is found in some profusion in
certain texts such as Wilson’s Sermons) and one would expect neu-chasley.
- It seems to be the opposite of casley as in casley rish ‘to be like’ which is in
origin (I think) a verb meaning ‘to ressemble’; therefore it should not be used
as an adjective and an- is not usually prefixed to verbs (except an-choodee
Isaiah 47:2)
I think it stems from Cregeen’s dictionary in the entry for lhiettrimmys, one of the
idiomatic words for ‘difference’ which Cregeen dislikes for some reason. He then
suggests caghlaa, anchaslys and neuchaslys as alternatives: caghlaa is attested in this
meaning, and the other two are probably made up by Cregeen as suggestions, just as
he suggests jeeoilid for ‘divinity’. I suppose that anchaslys and neuchaslys would
probably been comprehensible enough to Manx speakers, though since they already
had nouns meaning ‘difference’ they were unnecessary. And while anchaslys might
be acceptable because it has a noun ending, an adjective anchasley is not so good
because it does not seem to have an adjective ending.
For a start, the negative of t’eh casley rish e ayr ‘he is like his father’ would not be
*t’eh anchasley rish e ayr but rather cha nel eh casley rish e ayr, which is the normal
1
Bun as Bree 2
© Christopher Lewin 2011
way of negating verbal constructions, and even with adjectives: I think it is less
marked to say cha nel eh glen than t’eh neu-ghlen. Secondly, if we wanted an
adjective corresponding to anchaslys, would it not more naturally be something like
anchaslagh with an adjectival ending? I tried to use this form for a while; but
somehow it did not really work, because it still sounds and feels like a made-up word
for a concept which is very basic and must have been within the expressive capacities
of the old Gaelgeyryn.
Anchasley is unsatisfactory for another reason too: it is used in a variety of ways
which correspond exactly to English, as if we are thinking in English and looking
around for a catch-all word we can use to fill the gap that in English is covered by the
word ‘different’. However, just because there is a single word in English with various
uses does not mean that a single dubious Manx word anchasley can be dragged into
all the same positions; otherwise we are just mapping quasi-Manx words onto English
grammar.
Since the English word ‘different’ is used in several different ways, it may be that we
need more than one expression in Manx. This is the case in German:
verschiedene Farben - different colours (i.e. several colours, various colours)
andere Farben - different colours (i.e. other colours, particular colours that are
different from colours we have just been talking about)
diese Farben sind anders - these colours are different (predicative use; anders is a
form of anderer, -e, -es meaning ‘other’)
In Manx of course we have a word for ‘other’ elley, which like the German andere, -s
can stand in for ‘different’:
Ta mee geearree thie elley - I want a different house = I want another house
However, elley has a fairly weak meaning and can only be used in certain
circumstances; you cannot for example say *ta’n thie elley just as in English you
cannot say *‘the house is other’ (though you can say it in German as we have seen.)
Elley can also never be used to mean ‘various’ or ‘several’, which is what ‘different’
often means in English; and the unfortunate anchasley is often pressganged into
fulfilling this role as well:
*V’eh cummal ayns thieyn anchasley fud ny cheerey - He lived in different houses
throughout the country
However, there is a good idiomatic way of expressing this, which is amply and
uncontrovertibly attested in the Bible and elsewhere: caghlaaghyn, literally ‘changes’.
Caghlaaghyn is followed by the singular (presumably as a relic of the old genitive
plural, cf. thousane dooinney ‘a thousand men’), or occasionally the partitive
preposition dy and the (lenited) plural form. Either way the etymology is basically
‘changes of houses’ etc. which is the Manx way of saying ‘different’ or ‘various’ in
this sense. Therefore our example sentence should be:
2
Bun as Bree 2
© Christopher Lewin 2011
V’eh cummal ayns caghlaaghyn thie fud ny cheerey - He lived in different houses
throughout the country
Here are some examples from the Bible:
coamrey jeh caghlaaghyn sorch - a garment of divers [different / various] sorts
(Deuteronomy 22:11)
caghlaaghyn rass kione-y-cheilley - divers seeds [different seeds mixed together]
(Deuteronomy 22:9)
ayns caghlaaghyn dy aghtyn - in divers manners [different / various ways] (Hebrews
1:1)
Nish ta ayn caghlaaghyn dy ghiootyn, agh y Spyrryd cheddin - Now there are
diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit (1 Corinthians 12:4)
dy chaghlaaghyn daah - of divers [different] colours = multicoloured
And from the Homilies:
Ta ny caghlaaghyn keint shoh dy loo son oyryn ymmyrchagh as onneragh lowal -
all these maner of swearing [these various / different kinds of swearing], for causes
necessary and honest, be lawfull (Homily 7, p. 58)
Myr shoh ren nyn Saualtagh Creest loo caghlaaghyn keayrt gra, “dy firrinagh,
firrinagh.” - Thus did our Saviour Christ swear divers [various] times, saying, Verily,
verily (Homily 7, p. 59)
I find dy chaghlaaghyn daah to be a very elegant and very Manx way of saying what
in modern English would be ‘multicoloured’; there is no need to talk about daahghyn
anchasley and certainly no need to go anywhere near things like yl-daahagh! (Except
perhaps in very technical, jargonish and un-Gaelic contexts.)
Compare these Scottish examples from Dwelly’s dictionary:
air chaochladh dreach, in a different form; caochladh sheòrsachan, several kinds;
ann an caochladh àitean, in various places
To say ‘X is different from Y’, that is, when we are talking of a clear and explicit
distinction, contrast and opposition as opposed to mere variety, anchasley is slightly
harder to exorcise, because there are caghlaaghyn aght (different ways) to say it in
Manx, and the sentence structure may differ from the English.
We can simply paraphrase, by saying ‘X is not like Y’ or ‘X is not the same as Y’,
which may suffice in many cases:
Cha nel yn thie shoh myr / gollrish / casley rish yn thie shen - This house is different
[not like] from that house
3
Bun as Bree 2
© Christopher Lewin 2011
Eisht va mee booiagh firrinys y gheddyn jeh’n chiarroo veisht nagh row goll-rish veg
jeh’n vooinjer elley - Then I would know the truth of the fourth beast, which was
diverse from all the others [which was not like any of the others] (Daniel 7:19)
For ‘they are different’, Manx can say:
Cha nel ad goll ry-cheilley - They are not like each other
Cha nel ad co-laik - They are not alike
Here is an example from the Bible:
As haink kiare beishtyn mooar seose veih yn aarkey, nagh row goll ry-cheilley - And
four great beasts came up from the sea, diverse one from another (Daniel 7:3)
Or we can say ‘there is a difference between X and Y’. As already mentioned, the
words, caghlaa (basic meaning ‘change’), lhiettrimmys (‘hindrance, obstacle’), and
lheamys (‘defect’) are used. There is also a phrasal verb idiom jannoo soiaghey eddyr
X as Y, ‘to differentiate between X and Y’, which is probably an extension of the
meaning of jannoo soiaghey jeh ‘to esteem, value, evaluate’. Scansh is also used in a
similar way. There are several different spellings of lhiettrimys, even within the Bible.
As she Credjue ta jannoo’n caghlaa mooar ta eddyr dooinney as beagh [baagh] - And
it is Religion that makes the great Difference between a Man and a Beast (Fer-raauee
Creestee p. 7)
Agh y caghlaa mooar ta eddyr deiney mie as olk vees er ny yannoo ec laa ny briwnys,
tra vees ny Kirree er nyn goyrt er laue yesh Chreest, as ny Goair er y laue chiare - But
the great Difference will be made at the Day of Judgment, when the Sheep shall be set
on Christ’s right Hand, and the Goats on the left (Fer-raauee Creestee p. 31)
cre’n lhiettrimys mooar vees son shickyrys eddyr cronney ny crauee as ny mee-
chrauee ayns y theihl ta ry-heet - how very different the portion of good and bad men
is sure to be in the next world (Sharmaneyn Wilson p. 39)
She liorish yn Sacrament shoh t’yh, dy vel lhiettrimys jeant eddyr sharvaantyn
Chreest as sharvaantyn yn Noid-anmey - It is by this Sacrament that the subjects of
Christ are distinguished from the subjects of Satan (Sharmaneyn Wilson p. 144)
coontey plain as shickyr jeh’n ard lhiettrimys ta edyr staydyn ny crauee as ny mee-
chrauee lurg yn vaase - a plain and positive account of the very different condition of
good and bad men after death (Sharmaneyn Wilson p. 182)
As nish, ta shiu fakin dy plain, dy vel lhiettrimys foddey eddyr Creestee, as Creestee
firrinagh. - And now, you see plainly, that to be a Christian, and a true Christian, are
two very different things (Sharmaneyn Wilson p. 215)
As ynsee ad my phobble dy yannoo soiaghey eddyr casherick as an-chasherick, as dy
hoiggal y lhiettrimmys eddyr glen as neughlen - And they shall teach my people the
difference between the holy and profane, and cause them to discern between the
unclean and the clean (Ezekiel 44:23)
4
Bun as Bree 2
© Christopher Lewin 2011
As cha dug eh liettrimys erbee eddyr adsyn as shinyn, casherickey ny creeaghyn oc
liorish credjue - And put no difference between us and them, purifying their hearts by
faith (Acts 15:9)
Dy jarroo cairys Yee, ta liorish credjue Yeesey Creest, dauesyn ooilley, as orroosyn
ooilley ta credjal; son cha vel liettrimys erbee - Even the righteousness of God which
is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all and upon all them that believe: for there is no
difference (Romans 3:22)
ta ram lhiettrymmys ayns y daa sheean - there’s a lot of difference in the two sounds
(Thomas Christian; Broderick, Handbook of Late Spoken Manx p. 274)
va lhiettrymmys mooar eddyr Gaelg Skylley Maghal as Skyll Lonan as Gaelg ny
ayrnyn elley jeh yn Ellan - there was a great difference between Kirk Maughold and
Kirk Lonan Manx and the Manx of the other parts of the Island (Thomas Christian;
Broderick, Handbook of Late Spoken Manx p. 274)
Son cha vel veg y soiagh eddyr yn Hew as y Greek; son ta’n Chiarn cheddin harrish
ooilley, berchagh dauesyn ooilley ta geamagh er - For there is no difference between
the Jew and the Greek: for the same Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon him
(Romans 10:12)
Ta ny saggyrtyn eck er vrishey my leigh, as my reddyn casherick t’ad er vee-
ooashlaghey: cha vel ad er n’yannoo soiaghey erbee eddyr casherick as neu-
chasherick, chamoo ta scansh oc eddyr glen as neu-ghlen, as t’ad er n’ollaghey nyn
sooillyn veih my ghooneeyn, as ta mee er my oltooaney by-chyndagh roo - Her priests
have violated my law, and have profaned mine holy things: they have put no
difference between the holy and profane, neither have they shewed difference
between the unclean and the clean, and have hid their eyes from my sabbaths, and I
am profaned among them (Ezekiel 22:26)
There is also the word lheamys, which is used in Pargys Caillit at lines 1648, 1683,
2810 and 3263 in Robert Thomson’s edition. Thomson’s note on the word is as
follows:
1648 lheamys: both senses of the word are possible here: the ‘difference’ (2810)
between single Adam and the paired animals; and the ‘blemish’ (650) that this causes
to his contentment. At 1683, 3263, ta...lheamys can be construed as adj ‘different’ or
as vbn ‘differ’; as it is undoubtedly a noun, the latter is more probable.
There may be objections that these words have too many meanings and that we do
need a special word for ‘difference’. However, I think this is just the influence of
English. It is perfectly possible to have, for example, caghlaa meaning both ‘change’
and ‘difference’, because the context makes it clear what is intended. I question
whether Manx speakers would have perceived the word to have two meanings:
perhaps to them it had a single meaning that is simply broader than the English
meanings.
5
Bun as Bree 2
© Christopher Lewin 2011
It seems that the basic sense of caghlaa in Manx is ‘variation’, whether across time or
at a particular moment. In English, we call variation across time ‘change’ and
variation at a particular moment ‘difference’; but there is no reason why a language
should not use one word for both these types of variation, nor should we expect Manx
to conform to the English way of dividing up ‘semantic space’.
So is there any room left for anchasley and anchaslys? From a historical point of
view, there seems to be no need for them. The Manx language used to get by, and still
can get by, without a catch-all equivalent of the English word ‘different’. Having said
that, anchasley is now well-established and some will say there is no point fighting it.
However, that does not mean that the traditional idioms cannot be revived and used
alongside it. Anchasley is not ‘wrong’; just unnecessary and a bit English. The only
situation where anchasley would, I think, be categorically wrong is when ‘different’
means ‘various’. In this case, caghlaaghyn is the definitive Manx idiom.
Thus in the book Droghad ny Seihill, instead of:
*V’ee cooinaghtyn er ny taghyrtyn anchasley v’er jeet urree er y gherrid (p. 34)
the author should have written:
V’ee cooinaghtyn er ny caghlaaghyn taghyrt v’er jeet urree er y gherrid - She was
remembering the different / various things that had happened to her recently [the
various happenings that had come on her]
The same author does use caghlaaghyn correctly on p. 62 (caghlaaghyn keint dy leih
‘different types of people’) and on p. 194 (ny caghlaaghyn dy voteilyn ‘the various
bottles’), but he had evidently not yet fully weaned himself off anchasley, for he
inisists on using it profusely even where it is manifestly not necessary. He must have
been thinking in English when he made the protagonist say:
ta mee anchasley rish sleih elley - I am different from other people (p. 149)
when she could just as well have said:
cha nel mee gollrish sleih elley - I am not like other people
So in conclusion I would urge people to explore the alternative ways to talk about
‘difference’ in Manx. Apart from anything else, variety can’t be a bad thing.
Anchaslys is a legitimate Manx word—but it would most appropriate as a technical
term in philosophy etc. (closer in tone and formality to ‘dissimilitude’ in English than
‘difference’); caghlaa etc. are good enough for everyday use.
Proverb of the Month
Caghlaa obbyr aash - Change (/variety) of work is rest
(A nice zero copula, and it has the word caghlaa in it of course.)
6