Christopher Lewin
No. 5 - August 2011
A series of short articles on Manx Gaelic grammar, idiom,
vocabulary and pronunciation.
Prepositional reflexive verbs:
Last month I promised a closer look at these verbs, that is, phrasal verbs involving a
prepositional pronoun that agrees with the subject in person, gender and number.
The first one most learners encounter is cur lhiat (I always cite them in the 2nd person
singular—which, as in colloquial English, is in Manx also serves the impersonal form
‘one brings’—to distinguish them from verbs with prepositions which do not agree
with the subject, such as goaill rish):
Ta mee cur lhiam - I bring
Dug oo lhiat? - Did you bring? etc.
Note that the prepositional element usually comes as close to the subject as possible,
before the object and any adverbials:
ver-ym lhiam magh oo - I will bring thee forth (Ezekiel 38:4)
Note that lesh is semantically part of the verb, it does not here mean ‘with’. If you
want to say ‘I bring with me’ etc., you have to add a form of marish (and so have too
prepositional pronouns agreeing with the subject):
Gow Mark, as cur lhiat mayrt eh - Take Mark, and bring him with thee (2 Tim. 4:11)
The other most common prepositional reflexive is goll royd ‘to go on, to go off, to go
on one’s way, depart, leave’:
as nee oo chyndaa ’sy voghrey, as goll royd gys dty chabbaneyn - and thou shalt turn
in the morning, and go unto thy tents (Deut. 16:7)
ta mee faagail y seihll, as goll roym gys yn Ayr - I leave the world, and go to the
Father (John 16:28 )
As hie ee roee, as haink ee, as ren ee jeeassyragh ’sy vagher lurg ny beayneeyn - And
she went, and came, and gleaned in the field after the reapers (Ruth 2:3)
Esh [Eisht] hie eh roish dy ieu [iu] maarish [marish] y comraagyn [e chumraagyn] -
The he went his way to drink with his comrades (Ned Beg Hom Ruy, 15. Skeeal
Mysh Mac Erinagh)
Agh honnick y pobble ad goll roue - And the people saw them departing (Mark 6:33)
Immee royd ayns shee - Go in peace (2 Sam. 15:9)
Gow royd dy lhie - Go, lie down [Go off to lie / to bed] (1 Sam. 3:9)
Royd with pronoun oo but with no verb is found with imperative force. Royd oo is
something like ‘off you go’ in English:
Trog ort, royd oo gys y vagher foshlit - Arise, go forth into the plain (Ezek. 3:22)
Reue shiu, er-y-fa shen, gys nyn obbyr - Go therefore now, and work (Ex. 5:18)
Also without the pronoun:
Royd, immee gys y resowr shoh - Go, get thee unto this treasurer (Isaiah 22:15)
Reue is also found with the plural imperative ending -jee, as if it were a verb:
Cha row aym rieau ainjys erbee erriu: reue-jee voym, O shiuish ghrogh-yantee - I
never knew you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity [evildoers] (Matt. 7:23)
Reue-jee, te neu-ghlen, reue-jee, reue-jee, ny tar-jee faare ad - Depart ye; it is
unclean; depart, depart, touch not [do not come near them] (Lam. 4:15)
Note however, the idiom for ‘go on’ in the sense of ‘continue speaking’ is not gow
royd but gow lesh, which is not reflexive (it means literally ‘go with it’ where ‘it’ is
presumably what one is saying):
Eisht dooyrt y ven, Lhig da dty harvaant, ta mee guee ort, loayrt un ockle sodjey rish
my hiarn y ree. As dooyrt eshyn, Gow lesh - Then the woman said, Let thine
handmaid, I pray thee, speak one word unto my lord the king. And he said, Say on (2
Sam. 14:12)
As va bee soit roish: agh dooyrt eh, Cha jean-ym gee, derrey ta mee er n’insh my
eilkin: as dooyrt Laban rish, Gow lesh - And there was set meat before him to eat: but
he said, I will not eat, until I have told mine errand. And he said, Speak on. (Gen.
24:33)
There are a number of other verbs which work in the same way with royd, e.g. çheet
royd ‘come on’, cosney royd ‘escape, flee, get away’, geddyn royd ‘get away’, troggal
royd ‘depart, set off’, roie royd ‘run off’, getlagh royd ‘fly off’, creenagh royd ‘wither
away’, jeeaghyn royd ‘look out’.
Examples:
As haink ny bochillyn roue, cur gloyr as moylley da Jee son dy chooilley nhee v'ad
er chlashtyn as er vakin - And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for
all the things that they had heard and seen (Luke 2:20)
As dooyrt eh, Tar royd. As tra va Peddyr er jeet neose ass y lhong, huill eh er yn
ushtey, dy gholl gys Yeesey - And he said, Come. And when Peter was come down
out of the ship, he walked on the water, to go to Jesus (Matt. 14:29)
as chossyn ad rhymboo gys cheer Armenia - and they escaped into the land of
Armenia (2 Kings 19:37)
Gow nish dty vac, eer dty ynrican vac Isaac, eh shynney lhiat, as fow royd gys cheer
Moriah - Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into
the land of Moriah (Gen. 22:2)
Eisht haink sheshaght-caggee Pharaoh seose veih Egypt: as tra cheayll ny Caldeanee
va cruinnaghey stiagh Jerusalem skeeal jeu, hrog ad roue veih Jerusalem - Then
Pharaoh’s army was come forth out of Egypt: and when the Chaldeans that besieged
Jerusalem heard tidings of them, they departed from Jerusalem (Jer. 37:5)
As dooyrt eh rish, Roie royd: eisht ghow Ahimaaz yn aagherrit raad y thalloo-rea, as
chossyn eh er Cushi - And he said unto him, Run. Then Ahimaaz ran by the way of
the plain, and overran Cushi (2 Sam. 18:23)
Ta dty varchanyn earrooagh myr rollageyn yn aer, ta’n veishteig-vergagh stroie as
getlagh roish - Thou hast multiplied thy merchants above the stars of heaven: the
cankerworm spoileth, and fleeth [flies] away (Nahum 3:16)
Cre cha leah as ta’n billey figgagh er chreenagh roish - How soon is the fig tree
withered away (Matt. 21:20)
Myr shen dy row’n Chiarn mêriu, my lhig-yms y raad diuish as da’n vooinjer veggey
eu: jeeagh-jee reue, son ta olk rhymbiu - Let the Lord be so with you, as I will let
you go, and your little ones: look to it; for evil is before you (Exodus 10:10)
jeeagh royd, ta Jee feanish eddyr mish as uss - see, God is witness betwixt me and
thee (Gen. 31:50)
With er are troggal ort ‘get up, rise’, lhiggey ort ‘pretend’, fuirraghtyn / farkiagh ort
‘wait a moment, hold on’ (only in imperative), goaill ort ‘take on, take upon oneself;
pretend, presume, seem; try, attempt; begin’.
As hrog ad orroo yn oor cheddin, as hyndaa ad gys Jerusalem, as hooar ad yn un
ostyl yeig er nyn jaglym cooidjagh, as y cheshaght va maroo - And they rose up the
same hour, and returned to Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered together, and
them that were with them (Luke 24:33)
As hig eh gy-kione, ayns y voghrey ec irree ny greiney, dy drog oo ort, as tuittym er
y valley - And it shall be, that in the morning, as soon as the sun is up, thou shalt rise
early, and set upon the city (Judges 9:33)
Tar stiagh, uss ven Yeroboam; cre’n-fa t’ou lhiggey ort dy ve ben elley? - Come in,
thou wife of Jeroboam; why feignest thou thyself to be another? (1 Kings 14:6)
Ta fer ayn ta lhiggey er dy ve berchagh, ga nagh vel monney echey - There is that
maketh himself [pretends to be] rich, yet hath nothing (Prov. 13:7)
Eisht dooyrt ee, Fark ort, my inneen, derrey hee mayd kys hed y chooish: son cha
bee fea er y dooinney derrey vees eh er y laa shoh er chooilleeney e yialdyn - Then
said she, Sit still, my daughter, until thou know how the matter will fall: for the man
will not be in rest, until he have finished the thing this day (Ruth 3:18)
Caïd nagh bee jerrey er nyn ghoan? fuirree-jee erriu, as ny lurg shen nee mayd loayrt
- How long will it be ere ye make an end of words? mark, and afterwards we will
speak (Job 18:2)
fuirree ort - wait! (Thomas Christian, HLSM 2 p. 180)
The sense of goaill ort is difficult to translate in English. It often has a sense of
presumption, of taking it upon oneself to do something, often falsely, or unjustly. On
the other hand, it can be a neutral expression for undertaking to do something, or
merely beginning to do something. Compare in English, we often say things like ‘He
started swearing at us,’ when we are merely stating that swearing happened, and not
emphasizing its commencement; ‘started’ is little more than a filler word, and in
Manx goaill ort often seems to have similarly empty meaning. Very often in the
following examples it does not correspond to anything in the original text, but simply
adds a Manx idiomatic flavour.
Quoi-erbee ta goaill er dy heet coair cabbane casherick y Chiarn, bee eh er ny stroie -
Whosoever cometh any thing near unto the tabernacle of the Lord shall die (Num.
17:13)
Jean eshyn ta streeu rish yn Ooilley-niartal goaill er dy ynsaghey eh? eshyn ta geddyn
foill rish Jee, lhig da gansoor er y hon. Shall he that contendeth with the Almighty
instruct him? he that reproveth God, let him answer it (Job 40:2)
Agh my jir y charvaant shen ayns e chree, Ta my hiarn lhiggey shaghey dy heet; as
goaill er dy woalley ny fir-vooinjerey, as ny inneenyn, as dy ee, as dy iu, as dy ve er
meshtey - But and if that servant say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming; and
shall begin to beat the menservants and maidens, and to eat and drink, and to be
drunken (Luke 12:45)
T’eh myr dy baillish goaill er dy hoiaghey seose jeeghyn noa - He seemeth to be a
setter forth of strange gods [It is as if he wanted to presume to set up new gods] (Acts
17:18)
Son t’ou uss, O my Yee, er hoilshaghey da dty harvaant, dy jean oo thie y hroggal da:
shen-y-fa, ta dty harvaant er ghoaill er dy yannoo’n phadjer shoh kiongoyrt rhyt - For
thou, O my God, hast told thy servant that thou wilt build him an house: therefore thy
servant hath found in his heart to pray before thee (1 Chron. 17:25)
T’ad goaill orroo dy vel kenjallys jeean oc diu, agh cha nee ass aigney-mie; dy
jarroo, baillhieu shinyn y yeigh magh, dy gheddyn shiu daue hene - They zealously
affect you [pretend that they have eager kindness towards you], but not well; yea, they
would exclude you, that ye might affect them (Gal. 4:17)
T’ad goaill orroo dy vel tushtey oc dy Yee; agh ayns nyn obbraghyn t’ad gobbal eh,
feohdoil as mee-viallagh, as noi dy chooilley obbyr vie er nyn groghey - They profess
that they know God; but in works they deny him, being abominable, and disobedient,
and unto every good work reprobate (Titus 1:16)
dy vel ad dy arryltagh er ghoaill orroo dy hirveish er ny nooghyn - that they have
addicted themselves to the ministry of the saints [willingly have taken it upon them to
serve the saints] (1 Cor. 16:15)
As ren David e chliwe y chryssey gys e eilley-caggee, as ghow eh er dy hooyll lhien;
son cha row eh oayllagh er y lheid. As dooyrt David rish Saul, Cha voddym
gymmyrkey ad shoh; son cha vel mee oayllagh orroo. As hug David jeh ad - And
David girded his sword upon his armour, and he assayed [tried] to go; for he had not
proved it [was not used to it]. And David said unto Saul, I cannot go with these; for I
have not proved [am not used to] them. And David put them off him (1 Sam. 17:39)
lhisagh eh v’er ny choyrt gy-baase, er-y-fa dy ghow eh er dy nee Mac Yee v’eh - he
ought to die, because he made himself [pretended / claimed that he was] the Son of
God (John 19:7)
Agh Michael yn ard-ainle, tra ayns streeu rish y drogh-spyrryd, v’eh pleadeil
mychione corp Voses, cha ghow eh er dy choyrt stiagh plaiynt oltooanagh n’oï agh
dooyrt eh, Dy der y Chiarn oo dty-host - Yet Michael the archangel, when contending
with the devil he disputed about the body of Moses, durst not [did not take it upon
himself to] bring against him a railing accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee
(Jude 1:9)
Agh ghow ad orroo dy daaney dy gholl seose gys mullagh y clieau, agh cha ren arg
conaant y Chiarn, ny Moses scughey veih’n champ - But they presumed to go up unto
the hill top: nevertheless the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and Moses, departed not
out of the camp (Num. 14:44)
As nee eh loayrt goan mollaghtagh noi yn er smoo syrjey, as ver eh mow nooghyn yn
er smoo syrjey, as gowee eh er dy chaghlaa traaghyn, as leighyn - And he shall speak
great words against the most High, and shall wear out the saints of the most High, and
think to change times and laws (Dan. 7:25)
Chamoo gow-jee erriu dy ve mainshteryn, son ta un er nyn Mainshter, eer Creest -
Neither be ye called masters: for one is your Master, even Christ (Matt. 23:10)
Another series of prepositional reflexives involve the preposition veih / voish.
The most common is cur void, lit. ‘give / put / send from oneself’, which has a variety
of meanings. It can mean ‘give away, part with, avoid, put away, lay aside, get rid of,
be done with, send off, neglect, reject’.
T’eh fo saynt jollyssagh fey-ny-laa: agh ta’n feoiltagh coyrt voish lesh laue foshlit -
He coveteth greedily all the day long: but the righteous giveth and spareth not
(Proverbs 21:26)
nastee ta shiu er gheddyn, as dy nastee cur-jee veue - freely ye have received, freely
give (Matthew 10:8)
Ta mee er hreigeil my hie, ta mee er chur voym my eiraght - I have forsaken mine
house, I have left mine heritage (Jeremiah 12:7)
Agh questionyn ommijagh as giare-cheeayllagh cur voïd - But foolish and unlearned
questions avoid (2 Timothy 2:23)
T’ou er choyrt voïd ooilley dty yymmoose - Thou hast taken away all thy displeasure
(Psalms 85:3)
cur-jee veue tranlaase as spooilley - remove violence and spoil (Ezekiel 45:9)
T’eh myrgeddin er phointeil ordyr dy gheiney, nyn oik vees yh…dy chur voue lheid
ny chebbyn dy vyghin - He has also appointed an order of men, whose business it
shall be…to exhort christians not to neglect such offers of mercy (SW p. 176)
Jiooldey void, ‘reject’:
eshyn ta cheet hym, cha jeanym er aght erbee y yiooldey voym - him that cometh to
me I will in no wise cast out (John 6:37)
t’eh er n’yiooldey veih yn reeriaght as ny princeyn eck - he hath polluted the
kingdom and the princes thereof (Lam. 2:2)
Faagail void can mean ‘leave alone, leave in peace, let be’, and in this sense is a
synonym of lhiggey lesh, lhiggey fea da (where, by the way, lesh and da go with the
object e.g. Faag void mee = Lhig lhiam = Lhig fea dou):
Faag void shin, cre’n eie t’ayd orrin, Yeesey dy Nazareth? - Let us alone; what have
we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? (Mark 1:24)
Faag-jee veue ee, cre’n eïe t’eu urree? t’ee er n’yannoo obbyr vie orrym’s - Let her
alone; why trouble ye her? she hath wrought a good work on me (Mark 14:6)
Faag-jee veue eh, hee mayd jig Elias dy hauail eh - Let [him] be, let us see whether
Elias will come to save him (Matthew 27:49)
Faagail void can also mean ‘leave alone’ in the sense of ‘have nothing to do with,
leave well alone, abandon, forsake, leave off’:
Ta Ephraim er ny lhiantyn gys jallooyn: faag voïd eh - Ephraim is joined to idols: let
him alone (Hosea 4:17)
Lhie dty laue er my s’loys dhyt, cooinee er y chaggey, as faag voïd eh - Lay thine
hand upon him, remember the battle, do no more (Job 41:8)
It can also mean ‘leave out, omit’:
Faag void ny goan shoh er oie ghoonee - Leave out these words on a Saturday night1
(AG p. 62).
Similar to cur void, lhiggey void means ‘give away, part with, let go, give up, lend’
My chairys ta mee cummal shickyr, as cha lhiggym voym eh - My righteousness I
hold fast, and will not let it go (Job 27:6)
As yn eer sleih shen hene, nagh jinnagh son y seihl gobbal nyn gredjue, na lhiggey
voue nyn dreishteil jeh goll gys flaunys - And those very people, who would not for
the world deny their religion, or give up their hopes of heaven (SW p. 43)
Fakin er-y-fa shen dy vel yn oik shoh ain, myr ta shin er gheddyn myghin? cha vel
shin lhiggey nyn gree voin - Therefore seeing we have this ministry, as we have
received mercy, we faint not [we do not let out hearts from us] (2 Corinthians 4:1)
Ny jean phadeyrys noi Israel, as ny lhig fockle voïd noi thie Isaac - Prophesy not
against Israel, and drop not thy word against the house of Isaac (Amos 7:16)
Note also:
Deeasee yn charthan e hoyn woish as cha dooar eh arragh eh - The carthan lent away
his bottom and did not get it back (Cregeen’s Dictionary under carthan ‘an insect
found to have no vent below)
Ass can be used reflexively, e.g. cur yllagh assyd ‘shout’ lit. ‘put a shout out of you’:
Eisht hug deiney Yudah yllagh ard assdoo - Then the men of Judah gave a shout (2
Chronicles 13:15)
Finally, cur mood ‘get dressed, put on’ and cur jeed ‘get undressed, take off’:
cha der ad moo red erbee ta jannoo ollish - they shall not gird themselves with any
thing that causeth sweat (Ezek. 44:18)
1 Note that oie here refers to the ‘eve’ of Sunday, not the ‘evening’. ‘Sunday evening / night’ would be
oie Jedoonee.
jean-jee rooisht, as cur-jee j’iu, as kiangle-jee aanrit-sack mysh nyn meeghyn - strip
you, and make you bare, and gird sackcloth upon your loins (Is. 32:11)
More on cur lhiat:
In the passive in Classical Manx, the preposition usually agrees with the patient rather
than the agent:
veign er my choyrt lhiam veih’n vreïn gys yn oaie - I should have been carried from
the womb to the grave (Job 10:19)
Myr shen haink eh gy-kione…dy row Esther myrgeddin er ny choyrt lh’ee gys thie
yn ree - So it came to pass…that Esther was brought also unto the king’s house
(Esther 2:8)
As va aggle er ny deiney, er-y-fa dy row ad er nyn goyrt lhieu stiagh ayns thie
Yoseph, as dooyrt ad; Er coontey’n argid va er ny hyndaa ayns ny saick ain yn chied
cheayrt, ta shin er nyn goyrt lhien stiagh - And the men were afraid, because they
were brought into Joseph’s house; and they said, Because of the money that was
returned in our sacks at the first time are we brought in (Genesis 43:18)
In later Manx, the prepositional becomes invariable as cur lesh, regardless of the
person, number and gender of the subject:
ren ad cur lesh boteil y feesh [pheesh] - they brought a bottle each (Ned Beg, 1)
ren ish cur lesh mish dys Fleshwick - she brought me to Fleshwick (Ned Maddrell,
HLSM 2 pp. 113-4)
cur lesh back ad - bring them back (Harry Kelly, HLSM 2 p. 114)
va mee currit lesh dys Creneash - I was brought to Cregneash (NM, HLSM 2 p. 114)
Proverb of the Month:
Cha nee yn vooa smoo eieys smoo vlieaunys. - It’s not the cow that calls most which
gives most milk.
Abbreviations:
AG - Aght Giare dy heet gys tushtey as toiggal jeh’n Chredjue Creestee (translation of
Crossman’s Catechism), 1814
Ned Beg - Manx Stories and Reminiscences of Ned Beg Hom Ruy, Edward Faragher
(ed. George Broderick 1981)
SW - Sharmaneyn liorish Thomase Wilson (translations of some of Bishop Thomas
Wilson’s sermons), 1783
HLSM - Handbook of Late Spoken Manx, George Broderick, 1984