Christopher Lewin
No. 8 - November 2011
A series of short articles on Manx Gaelic grammar, idiom,
vocabulary and pronunciation.
Lesser-known prepositions:
A look at some prepositions that are not mentioned in most Manx course books, but
which are nonetheless useful.
er-dy - since
Er-dy is the standard equivalent of ‘since’ + NOUN in Classical Manx. It is followed
by lenition:
Agh er-dy hoshiaght y theihll, chroo Jee ad fyrrynagh as bwoirrynagh - But from the
beginning of the creation God made them male and female (Mark 10:6)
As er-dy laghyn Ean Bashtey derrey nish, ta sleih chionney stiagh gys reeriaght niau,
as t’adsyn ta cheet lesh jeeanid cosney stiagh ayn - And from the days of John the
Baptist until now the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take it by
force (Matthew 11:12)
Uniquely among prepositions it is attached to the definite article without an
apostrophe1, yielding er-dyn ‘since the’:
Er-dyn laa haink nyn ayraghyn magh ass cheer Egypt gys y laa jiu - Since the day
that your fathers came forth out of the land of Egypt unto this day (Jeremiah 7:25)
Some confusion seems to have set in though, with er-dyn sometimes being used for
the indefinite and the plural:
er-dyn toshiaght y theihll - since the beginning of the world (Isaiah 64:4)
er dyn chenn earishyn - of ancient times (2 Kings 19:25)
Neayr or neayr’s (originally from Gaelic an uair, used in Irish and Scottish for
relative ‘when’) may be pressed into service as a preposition equivalent to er-dy.
1 Though note the spelling in er d’yn chroo gys cheet Chreest ‘from the creation to the coming of
Christ’ (Wilson’s Sermons p. 136)
Neayr ny laghyn shen - Since those days (Haggai 2:16)
Neayr’s y traa shoh nurree - Since this time last year (HLSM 2 p. 320)
But er-dy is still attested in Late Spoken Manx:
er-dy nurree - since last year (HLSM 2 p. 148)
er-dy y shiaghtin chaie (id.)
Er-dy occurs in two common idioms:
er-dy rieau - forever (past), ‘since always’
er-dy henney - ago; since, since then
Examples of er-dy rieau:
er-yn-oyr dy bynney lesh y Chiarn Israel er dy rieau, shen-y-fa ren eh ree jeed’s -
because the Lord loved Israel for ever, therefore made he thee king (1 Kings 10:9)
Ta dty ghoo’s firrinagh er-dy-rieau - Thy word is true from everlasting (Psalm
119:160)
Note that er-dy henney has two distinct meanings. After a quantity of time, it means
‘ago’. On its own it means ‘since’ (when English uses ‘since’ without anything
following, that is, when it means ‘since then, since that time’).
Compare the following examples:
ago
Kiare laa er-dy-henney va mish my
hrostey - Four days ago I was fasting
(Acts 10:30)
Va olbynagh [Albinagh] elley
ayns shoh blein er dy hinney [henney] -
There was another Scotsman here a year
ago (Ned Beg 11)
bleeantyn er dy henney - years ago
(HLSM 2 p. 149)
since
As cha hrog phadeyr er-dy-henney ayns
Israel gollrish Moses - And there arose
not a prophet since in Israel like unto
Moses (Deuteronomy 34:10)
va shen yn ch[i]ed cheayrt ren mee
rie[a]u fakin dhiney [deiney] tuittym
magh er booayrd batthey [er boayrd
baatey], as cha ren mee rie[a]u fakin agh
feer veg jeh er dy henney - that was the
first time I ever saw men falling out on
board ship, and I’ve only ever seen very
little of it since (Ned Beg 3)
cha row mee rieau ec yn boayl shen er dy
henney - I’ve never been in that place
since (HLSM 2 p. 149)
jeeragh er - opposite (“over against”), facing, in front of
This is common in the Bible, and appears to be the normal Manx equivalent of
‘opposite’. The Oxford English Dictionary gives the senses ‘adjacent to, facing,
opposite’ for the phrase ‘over against’, and cites Mark 13:3 as an example.
As myr v’eh ny hoie er cronk ny Oliveyn, jeeragh er y chiamble, denee Peddyr as
Jamys, as Ean, as Andreays jeh er-lheh And as he sat upon the mount of Olives over
against the temple, Peter and James and John and Andrew asked him privately (Mark
13:3)
As y voalley va er cheu-mooie jeeragh er ny shamyryn, lesh yn chooyrt sodjey magh
roish ny shamyryn, va’n lhiurid echey jeih cubityn as da-eed - And the wall that was
without over against the chambers, toward the utter court on the forepart of the
chambers, the length thereof was fifty cubits (Ezekiel 42:7)
As jeeragh er ny shamyryn, va walk jeih cubityn er lheead er cheu-sthie, as keead
cubit ayns lhiurid, as ny giattyn lesh y twoaie - And before the chambers was a walk
to ten cubits breadth inward, a way of one cubit; and their doors toward the north.
(Ezekiel 42:4)
As hie as hoie ee sheese jeeragh er, thammylt mie veih, mysh orraghey sidey: son
dooyrt ee, Ny lhig dou fakin baase y lhiannoo. As hoie ee sheese jeeragh er, as hrog
ee seose e coraa, as ren ee keayney - And she went, and sat her down over against
him a good way off, as it were a bow shot: for she said, Let me not see the death of
the child. And she sat over against him, and lift up her voice, and wept (Genesis
21:16)
kione
The complex preposition kione—originally a form of the preposition ayns (Irish i),
which has since been elided, plus the noun kione ‘head, end’—has three distinct
meanings:
1)	mixed with
2)	leading
3)	in, within, after (with expressions of time)
1)	The meaning ‘mixed with’ is usually used of physical substances. Note the
expression kione y cheilley ‘mixed together’. Kione y cheilley is a neutral expression
referring to a physical state of affairs, such as the mixing of ingredients in cooking.
The semantically relation expression fud y cheilley tends to have more negative
connotations, meaning ‘mixed up, confused’, whether in a physical or a mental sense.
The only commonly encountered pronominal form is the 3rd person singular ny chione
‘mixed with it’. (The appearance of ny shows that this is an ‘ayns’ preposition.)
Examples:
As son wheesh as dy vaik oo yiarn kione y chray hallooin, nee ad seiy ad hene fud
sluight deiney, agh cha jean ad lhiantyn dy cheilley, eer myr nagh vel yiarn taah rish
cray - And whereas thou sawest iron mixed with miry clay, they shall mingle
themselves with the seed of men: but they shall not cleave one to another, even as iron
is not mixed with clay (Daniel 2:43)
As yiow aarloo oural-arran lesh dagh moghrey, yn cheyoo ayrn dy ephah, as y trass
ayrn jeh hin dy ooil dy chur kione y flooyr meein - And thou shalt prepare a meat
offering for it every morning, the sixth part of an ephah, and the third part of an hin of
oil, to temper with the fine flour (Ezekiel 46:14)
As bee’n oural-arran oc dy flooyr lesh ooil ny-chione - And their meat offering shall
be of flour mingled with oil (Numbers 29:3)
Cha jean oo dty gharey-feeyney y chuirr lesh caghlaaghyn rass kione-y-cheilley -
Thou shalt not sow thy vineyard with divers seeds [mixed together] (Deuteronomy
22:9)
hug eh lesh mysh keead punt dy vyrrh as dy aloes kione y cheilley - [he] brought a
mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred pound weight (John 19:39)
2)	‘Leading’.
Example:
Lhig-jee daue: she leeideilee doal ad ta kione y vooinjer ghoal. As my ta’n doal
shooyll kione y doal, tuittee ad ny-neesht ayns y jeeg - Let them alone: they be blind
leaders of the blind. And if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch
(Matthew 14:14)
3)	Kione is used with expressions of time to mean the time within which or just after
which something occurs, where English uses in, within (and where Manx may also
use ayns) or after:
Tar-jee hym reesht kione three laa - Come again unto me after three days (2
Chronicles 10:5)
kione tammylt dy cra [hraa] ren shin prowal reesht - After a while we ‘proved’
again (Ned Beg 7)
BUT: ayns shiaghtin dy hraa ver-yms fliaghey er y thalloo, da-eed laa as da-eed oie
- yet seven days, and I will cause it to rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights
(Genesis 7:4)
raad
This preposition has two senses:
1)	via, by, by way of
2)	towards, to, to meet
1)	Examples:
Ta jurnah un laa jeig, veih Horeb raad cronk Seir, gys Kadesh-barnea - There are
eleven days’ journey from Horeb by the way of mount Seir unto Kadeshbarnea
(Deuteronomy 1:2)
Agh ny-yeih, (as eshyn,) lhig dou roie. As dooyrt eh rish, Roie royd: eisht ghow
Ahimaaz yn aagherrit raad y thalloo-rea, as chossyn eh er Cushi - But howsoever,
said he, let me run. And he said unto him, Run. Then Ahimaaz ran by the way of the
plain, and overran Cushi (2 Samuel 18:23)
cur-my-ner, t’ad cheet seose raad liargagh Ziz, as hee shiu ad ec kione y choan,
liorish faasagh Jeruel - behold, they come up by the cliff of Ziz; and ye shall find
them at the end of the brook, before the wilderness of Jeruel (2 Chronicles 19:16)
dy chooilley unnane hed raad Vabylon, gowee ad yindys, as nee ad gannidys er
ooilley ny t’ee dy hurranse - every one that goeth by Babylon shall be astonished, and
hiss at all her plagues [all that she suffers] (Jeremiah 50:13)
2)	Examples, with pronominal forms ny raad etc.:
As haink troailtagh raad y dooinney berchagh - And there came a traveller unto the
rich man - (2 Samuel 12:4)
er-be dy vel mee soiaghey jeh persoon Jehoshaphat ree Yudah, cha jeeaghin dty raad,
ny fakin oo - were it not that I regard the presence of Jehoshaphat the king of Judah, I
would not look toward thee, nor see thee (2 Kings 3:14)
Goll trooid y traid, er-gerrey da’n corneil eck, as hie eh raad e thie - Passing through
the street near her corner; and he went the way to her house (Proverbs 7:8)
As cha leah’s daag eh eh, haink lion ny raad, as varr eh eh - And as soon as he was
departed from him, a lion found him, and slew him (1 Kings 20:36)
Shen-y-fa ren eh resooney ayns y synagogue rish ny Hewnyn, as rish ny deiney
crauee, as ayns thie ny quaallagh gagh laa roosyn va cheet ny raad - Therefore
disputed he in the synagogue with the Jews, and with the devout persons, and in the
market [court-house] daily with them that met with him (Acts 17:17)
A common idiom is raad y vaaish, literally ‘in the way of death’, which is the
standard Manx way of saying ‘dying’ when the emphasis is on the approach to death,
not the actual moment. Cf. English ‘at death’s door’.
Son va un ynrycan inneen echey, va mysh daa vlein jeig dy eash, as v’ee raad y
vaaish - For he had one only daughter, about twelve years of age, and she lay a dying
(Luke 8:42)
Cur-my-ner, ta mee raad y vaaish; as cre sheeagh dou yn eiraght shoh? - Behold, I
am at the point to die: and what profit shall this birthright do to me? (Genesis 25:32)
Son v’eh lhag dy jarroo as raad y vaaish: agh ren Jee myghin er - For indeed he was
sick nigh unto death: but God had mercy on him (Philippians 2:27)
coair, faare - near
These prepositions seem to have nearly the same meaning, ‘(coming) near, towards’,
often with an implication of touching or contact, and are both conjugated ny aare, ny
choair etc.:
chamoo nee chingys trome erbee cheet faare dty chummal - neither shall any plague
come nigh thy dwelling (Numbers 9:10)
My vees dooinney erbee jiuish, ny jeh nyn sluight neu-ghlen, liorish cheet faare corp
marroo, ny er jurnah foddey jeh, ny-yeih nee eh yn chaisht y reayll gys y Chiarn - If
any man of you or of your posterity shall be unclean by reason of a dead body, or be
in a journey afar off, yet he shall keep the passover unto the Lord (Exodus 19:12)
va skell sollys er e eddin; as va aggle orroo dy heet ny aare - the skin of his face
shone; and they were afraid to come nigh him (Exodus 34:30)
bee mainyn aarloo dy ghoaill e vioys my jig eh nyn vaar - we, or ever [if] he come
near, are ready to kill him (Acts 23:15)
haink eh m’aare - he came towards me (HLSM 2 p. 155)
Quoi-erbee ta goaill er dy heet coair cabbane casherick y Chiarn, bee eh er ny stroie -
Whosoever cometh any thing near unto the tabernacle of the Lord shall die (Numbers
17:13)
Shass ort hene, ny tar my choair; son ta mee ny s’casherick na uss - Stand by thyself,
come not near to me; for I am holier than thou (Isaiah 65:5)
Agh cha row Abimelech er jeet ny coaïr - But Abimelech had not come near her
(Genesis 20:4)
A form of faare with a disjunctive personal pronoun is also attested:
Deïe ad daue, Reue-jee, te neu-ghlen, reue-jee, reue-jee, ny tar-jee faare ad - They
cried unto them, Depart ye; it is unclean; depart, depart, touch [them] not
(Lamentations 4:15)
Note also faare used as an adverb qualifying an equative:
As cred eh son Firrinys shickyr, nagh vel Aigney ghiastyllagh as aarloo dy leih faar
cha vondeishagh da Persoon erbee, as te dasyn echey te - And believe it for a certain
Truth, that a charitable and forgiving Temper is not nearly so beneficial to any body
as to him that hath it (Shibber y Chiarn p. 48)
Proverb of the Month:
Ellagyn aase as ellagyn y vaase - Growing hiccoughs and death hiccoughs.