Christopher Lewin
No. 13 - April 2012
A series of short articles on Manx Gaelic grammar, idiom,
vocabulary and pronunciation.
The past habitual.
I have been asked by a number of people to clarify the issue of how the past habitual
(I used to do, I would do) is expressed in Manx. This is a matter of some controversy
among academics, and papers have been written in journals on this subject by Jennifer
Kewley Draskau (2006, Journal of Celtic Linguistics 10 pp. 85-120) and George
Broderick (2011, Scottish Gaelic Studies 28 pp. 307-332).
The controversy centres on whether the conditional veign / yinnin jannoo should be
used as an imperfect or past habitual. Kewley Draskau surmises that this usage arose
“probably through the influence of English on the Manx speech of the older speakers
and a conflation of the functions of English ‘would’” (p. 88) and that “in modern [i.e.
revived] Manx, v/beagh and y/jinnagh are no longer frequently encountered as
expressions of consuetudinal past events or states, either in speech or in texts, but are
returned to their functions as subjunctives or conditionals. This is possibly a
deliberate return to the orthodoxy of Biblical Manx, where the use of a conditional to
express habitual past was so unusual as to arouse comment from Thomson” (p. 102).
Broderick on the other hand points out (p. 328) that Kewley Draskau “has seemingly
not understood that veagh / beagh in Spoken Manx can be represented by /vi(:)x/,
/bi(:)x/ for the imperfect (cf. Ir. bhíodh) and /ve(:)x/, /be(:)x/ for the conditional
(secondary future) (cf. Ir. bheadh)” (i.e. the past habitual and the conditional, which
were (and) are similar in form but nonetheless distinct in Irish, have fallen together in
Manx so that the same form may be used in both functions, as is the case in Scottish
Gaelic, where use of the ‘conditional’ to mean ‘used to…’ is very common).
Moreover, Broderick uses phonetic data from the last native speakers to assert the
hypothesis that “Although in the substantive verb the old imperfect and secondary
future have fallen together in Manx in the written form of the old secondary future,
nevertheless, in the spoken language some semblance of distinction was made along
traditional lines, i.e. /vi(:)x/ (Ir. bhíodh) was used for the imperfect and /ve(:)x/ (Ir.
bheadh) for the secondary future, though later the distinction became blurred” (p.
327).
1
Broderick’s hypothesis that the past habitual survived into Late Manx is certainly
plausible; there is no particular reason to suppose that it should have died out, even if
it merged in form with the conditional. It survives heartily in Modern Scottish Gaelic,
although there is no difference in form between the two tenses in that language. The
main problem with it is that the use of the ‘conditional’ for past habitual does not
seem to be at all common in the Classical Manx of the Bible and other texts. Kewley
Draskau (p. 91) cites the example of John 19.17 gys ynnyd yiarragh ad ynnyd y vollag
rish ‘to a place called the place of the skull’ and claims ‘this particular instance may
well constitute the first recorded use of the conditional as an imperfect, a usage which
later became so widespread in ‘Late Manx’ that some grammarians and
lexicographers dissolve the distinction between form and function’. She also observes
(same page) that ‘Thomson (1981: 142) notes that the use of the conditional
(yiarragh) as an imperfect in this idiom is quite exceptional’.
While it is perfectly possible and a priori quite likely that the Irish past habitual
should have continued through Classical and Late Manx, the paucity of examples in
Classical Manx could pose a challenge to this: are we to suppose that the past habitual
existed ‘underground’ and largely unrecorded in popular speech throughout the
eighteenth century and only pops up again in the Manx of Edward Faragher and the
last native speakers?
Another consideration is the situation in Scottish Gaelic. Here the merging of the
conditional with the past habitual is mirrored by the merging of the future with the
present habitual tense.
So Irish: chuirfeadh ‘would put’ and chuireadh ‘used to put’ > Scottish chuireadh
cuirfidh ‘will put’ and cuiridh (later cuireann1) ‘puts’ > Scottish cuiridh
bheadh ‘would be’ and bhíodh ‘used to be’ > Scottish bhiodh (bhitheadh)
beidh ‘will be’ and bidh ‘tends to be’ > Scottish bidh (bithidh)
The Irish -f- is usually pronounced [h] today, in Scottish Gaelic it has been lost
entirely resulting in the forms with -f- (conditional and future) being identical in form
with the forms without -f- (past and present habitual). In the verb ‘to be’ the forms in
[i] (past and present habitual) have supplanted the forms in [e] (conditional and
future). Either way the distinction in form between the conditional and the past
habitual, and between the future and the present habitual, has been entirely lost in
modern Scottish Gaelic. However the use of bhiodh a’ dèanamh ‘used to (be) do(ing)’
remains very common in Scottish Gaelic, and looks similar to how Faragher uses it.
Compare:
Bhiodh mi fhìn ’s mo pheathraichean, gu h-àraid mise, bhiodh sinn a’ cluich
‘taighean beaga’ - ‘Myself and my sisters, especially me, we’d play at ‘little houses’’
(Mas math mo chuimhe: Reflection of the Gaels, 2010, p. 52)
And:
1 cuireann was originally the dependent form, it is now used for both independent and dependent of the
present tense in Irish.
2
Vagh y ny cheayrtyn tra vagh bine beg rouyr dy yogh ayns y volg gholl mygeayrt
lesh y vadjey ayns y laue2 - Sometimes when there was too much ale in his belly he
would go about with the stick in his hand (EF 12)
However, Gaelic also uses the present/future tense in a similar way:
Bidh sgoiltean a’ tighinn a-staigh a Thaigh Chearsabhagh, agus cuideachd bidh mise
a’ dol a-mach gu sgoiltean cuideachd, agus cuideachd bidh mi ag obair le buidhnean
eile, um, coltach ri seann dhaoine a tha a’ fuireach anns an ospadal, no seann dhaoine
a tha a’ fuireach ann an Trìonaid - Schools come into Taigh Chearsabhagh, and also I
go out to schools too, and also I work with other groups, um, like old people who live
in the hospital, or old people who live in Trinity (Taigh Chearsabhagh Heritage
Officer Interview, Guthan nan Eilean, Sabhal Mòr Ostaig3)
In the last example, note how the present habitual progressive with bidh (Manx bee) is
used for habitual or repeated actions (such as going out to schools), but the simple
present (progressive) with tha (Manx ta) is used to denote continuous states, as well
as continuous actions, where there is no emphasis on habituality. In Manx, in contrast,
ta is used for both and bee only has a future meaning.
Ta mee goll magh dys scoillyn - I (habitually / repeatedly) go out to schools
Ta mee cummal ayns Doolish - I live in Douglas
Since Manx does not share Scottish Gaelic’s use of the future for habitual present, one
might expect this to be paralleled in the past, with the ordinary past continuous with
va being used for both functions. This indeed appears to be largely the case in
Classical Manx, where e.g. V’eh goll mygeayrt… might be expected instead of Veagh
eh goll mygeayrt… for ‘he used to go about’. This would suggest that the later
widespread use of veagh in this way could indeed be from English influence (note that
English too has this distinction in the past but not the present, like Manx but unlike
Gaelic).
However, if Broderick is right about two separate forms of the verb ‘to be’ being
preserved, then this would suggest that the inherited Gaelic past habitual did indeed
persist in Manx. His data is persuasive but the limited number of examples, and the
confounds, mean that it cannot be regarded as conclusive.
Here is a summary of all the instances he gives of the two forms from the native
speakers (Harry Kelly once apparently corrects himself from the conditional form to
the past habitual; M means recorded by Marstrander, identity of informant unknown).
Habitual (Irish bhíodh > Mx. *vi:x)
vi:x - HK, HK (<ve:x), NM, NM, NM, NM, NM, NM, TC, TC, HK, NM, NM, HK,
NM, NM (16)
ve:x - HK, HK, JW (3)
2 Veagh eh ny cheayrtyn tra veagh bine beg rour dy yough ayns e volg goll mygeayrt lesh y vaidjey
ayns e laue
3 http://www.ambaile.org/en/item/item_videofilm.jsp?item_id=96210
3
Conditional (Irish bheadh > Mx. *ve:x)
ve:x - M, M, M, M, M, M, NM, HB, TC (9)
vi:x - NM (1)
There seems to be a tendency to use realization with [e] or similar vowels in the
conditional and ones with [i] for the past habitual, but these data come from limited
numbers of speakers and only Ned Maddrell and Thomas Christian give the expected
forms for both functions; Maddrell also has an [i] form for conditional. Also the
spellings in Faragher’s stories are inconclusive: there is no clear distinction made
between two pronunciations; he usually rights vagh indiscriminately, and forms such
as been for the first person singular (Irish bhéinn and bhínn).
A summary of the two positions for and against the idea that the use of ‘conditional’
forms as past habitual was a natural continuation of older forms in the language, as
opposed to being a late English-influenced innovation.
Points which support the two positions (my points, some following theirs)	
(Broderick) -	the use of veagh etc. for past habitual is largely a natural continuation of the Irish past habitual tense -	the conditional and past habitual functions of v/beagh are differentiated in pronunciation in Late Spoken Manx	(Kewley Draskau) - the use of v/beagh etc. for past habitual is a Late Manx innovation inspired by English influence
One would expect the conditional and past habitual to fall together in form but continue with both functions into Classical and Late Manx	There are few or no examples from Classical Manx. How did the past habitual remain underground for so long and then pop up in Late Manx?
Bhiodh etc. is widely used for both conditional and past habitual in Scottish Gaelic.	Scottish Gaelic uses the future tense as a present habitual, but this does not occur in Manx. This would be paralleled by the absence of the conditional with a past habitual function.
Broderick finds differences in pronunciation between the two different functions of v/beagh which suggest that the Irish distinction between bheadh (conditional) and bhíodh (past habitual) was maintained into Late Manx.	There was wide variation in pronunciation in Late Spoken Manx and the distinction Broderick finds is not completely consistent. Moreover the number of examples is quite small. His findings are suggestive and plausible, but not conclusive.
Edward Faragher extensively uses the ‘conditional’ form with a past habitual function.	Although Edward Faragher uses the ‘conditional’ with a past habitual function, he does not make any distinction in spelling between [vi:x] and [ve:x] as might be expected if such a distinction was maintained two generations after him (and his spelling generally closely follows his pronunciation, see Broderick 1982: 178)
Summary of the expression of the past habitual in Manx. Example sentence ‘I used to
play’:
1)	Va mee cloie
As ve cliaghtey ny saggyrtyn cheddin dy yannoo rish y pobble, tra va dooinney erbee
chebbal oural, haink sharvaant y taggyrt, choud’s va’n eill dy vroïe, lesh aall three-
meïr ayns e laue - And the priest’s custom with the people was, that, when any man
4
offered sacrifice, the priest’s servant came, while the flesh was in seething, with a
fleshhook of three teeth in his hand (1 Sam. 2:13)
This use of the past progressive with va/row is common, and is used alongside
v/beagh in Late Manx, as in this example from Faragher:
va ny yeesteeryn mannanagh giu ayns thie Kelly; jonnie yoan antonee vagh ad gra
rish ayns ny laghyn shen, as vagh dheiney arklow giu ayns thie Turnbull son cha row
cordaill erbee eddyr oc—the Manx fishermen would drink in Kelly’s—Johnnie Juan
Anthony’s is what they called it in those days—and the men from Arklow would
drink in Turnbull’s (EF 12)
The behaviour of the Manx fishermen and the Arklow fishermen are clearly parallel,
so the two forms are used interchangeably (though the veagh form probably
emphasizes the habitual meaning more).
2)	Va mee cliaghtey cloie
Ny my ve er fys da’n er by-liesh y dow, dy row eh cliaghtey puttey, as nagh vel eh
er ghoaill kiarail jeh, nee eh son shickyrys geeck dow son dow, as bee'n marroo lesh
hene - Or if it be known that the ox hath used to push in time past, and his owner hath
not kept him in; he shall surely pay ox for ox; and the dead shall be his own. Exodus
21:36
This can also be used with other tenses, t’eh cliaghtey jannoo ‘he usually does’ etc.
3)	Boallin cloie
This is originally from a copula phrase b’oayllagh with the adjective oayllagh
‘acquainted’ (G. eolach), but it has been completely reanalysed as a conditional / past
habitual verb form with the -agh ending, and therefore the form boallin arose for the
first person. These forms are completely normal and there is no trace of the original
analysis in Classical Manx, so efforts to restore *b’oayllagh dou and the like are
anachronistic.
Hem’s magh myr boallin, dy chraa mee-hene - I will go out as at other times before
[as I used to], and shake myself (Judges 16:20)
Nagh nee shoh eshyn boallagh soie shirrey jeirk? - Is not this he that sat and begged
[that used to sit seeking alms]? (John 9:8)
4)	Chloiein, yinnin cloie, veign cloie
As noted by Thomson and Kewley Draskau, these forms do not seem to be common
in Classical Manx for past habitual.
Conclusion:
It seems impossible currently to come to a firm conclusion either way about whether
the use of the ‘conditional’ for past habitual is a natural continuation in Manx of an
5
inherited form, or a late imitation of English. It may be a mixture of both: Broderick
concedes this possibility when he writes (pp. 307-308), ‘As pointed out by Kewley-
Draskau (2006: 114-115), contact with English (either through education or other
means), initially among educated Manx people (including the Manx Bible translators),
filtering down in the course of time to the ordinary people, especially when they
became bilingual and later predominantly speakers of English, influences from
English would naturally be expected, including interpretations of English “would”,
and in this regard may have subconsciously coloured their use of the appropriate
Manx form to express “would” when speaking or writing Manx. This scenario cannot
be ruled out’ but considers that ‘Nevertheless, it is believed that there is a certain
residue of the appropriate use of “would” in spoken and written Manx which has
come down to us’.
Whatever its origins, though, the use of v/beagh etc. for the past habitual is well
established in Late Manx, it is not simply an occasional feature. Moreover, Faragher’s
Manx is in other respects lexically and idiomatically rich and grammatically accurate,
and he was born in the 1830s in a largely monoglot Manx-speaking community
(Cregneash): his Manx should therefore reflect natural pre-decay usage. There seems
therefore no particular reason to avoid it in contemporary Manx, though the other
strategies shown above are equally acceptable.
Conditional perfect
Manx uses the conditional tense in both the protasis (the ‘if’) and the apodosis (the
‘then’).
Agh dy beagh fys er ve euish, cre ta er ny hoiggal liorish y raa shoh, Share lhiam
myghin na oural, cha beagh shiu er gheyrey yn vooinjer neu-chyndagh - But if ye
had known what this meaneth, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, ye would not have
condemned the guiltless (Matt. 12:7)
Agh dy beagh ad er hassoo gys my choyrle, as v’er choyrt da my phobble toiggal
jeh my ghoo, eisht veagh ad er hyndaa ad veih nyn raaidyn mee-chrauee, as veih nyn
ghrogh-yannoo - But if they had stood in my counsel, and had caused my people to
hear my words, then they should have turned them from their evil way, and from the
evil of their doings (Jer. 23:22)
But the past tense va / row can also be used in the apodosis:
Son mannagh beagh veg y treishteil jeh myghin er ve, cha row shin rieau er ve
tayrnit gys arrys, agh dy jarroo goll-rish ny Jouill hene, va shin er hannaghtyn laane
dy Vyskit as dy Ghoanlys noi Jee, dy bollagh mee-hreisteil er cooney veih - And if
there had been no Hopes of Mercy, we should never have been drawn to Repentance,
but, even like the Devils themselves, should have remained full of Hatred and Malice
against God, utterly despairing of Relief from him (FRC p. 12:25)
dy beagh yh er aght elley, cha row eh er ghoail padjer gys Jee eh dy leih daue -
otherwuise he would not have prayed that God would forgive them (SW p. 226)
6
My with conditional
Although dy + dependent is the historically correct form to use with the conditional /
past subjunctive, my + independent is often substituted: ‘my is not uncommon,
especially to avoid the ambiguity attaching to dy’ (Thomson note, FRC 26.1, also LS
11:40).
Ny my huittagh ad ayns stayd injil, foast ta dy chooilley pheccagh mie bione ad
aarloo dy ghoaill chymmey jeu as dy eaysley orroo - Or if they should fall into a low
Condition, yet all good People that know them are ready to pity and relieve them
(FRC p. 26)
Son my veagh Joshua er chur fea daue, cha row eh ny lurg shen er loayrt mychione
laa elley - For if Jesus had given them rest, then would he not afterward have spoken
of another day (Heb. 4:8)
my yinnagh dooinney ooilley e chooid seihlt son graih, cha beagh yn soiagh sloo
jeant jeh - if a man would give all the substance of his house for love, it would utterly
be contemned (Cant. 8:7)
Future and conditional for volition (‘I will, I would’ = ‘I want’)
In Manx as in English the conditional and the future sometimes appear to imply
wanting to do something. Thomson (FRC 36.7 note on cha neaishtagh ad ‘they would
not hear’) treats such usages in Manx as ‘misinterpretations’ of an ‘English
ambiguity’, and it may well be that English influence is evident here, though given
that such usages are fairly common, it may be too harsh to judge such usages as
always being a result of a misunderstanding (Lewin 2011: . Moreover, I see no
particular reason why this usage shouldn’t have arisen naturally. If words such as
‘will’ can go from meaning ‘want’ to meaning simply future in English, then why
couldn’t it go the other way. ‘I would do it’ (with an implied condition clause ‘if I
could’) could, I think, easily give rise to a meaning of volition.
Proverb of the Month:
Bannit t’adsyn ta ruggit bwoirrin, t’ad sauchey veih dagh geay as dorrin - Blessed are
they who are born female, they are safe from every wind and tempest
References and abbreviations:
Broderick, George (2011): ‘The Imperfect and Secondary Future in Late Spoken
Manx
Kewley Draskau, Jennifer (2006): ‘Interlingual contact: Some modals with variable
morphology in Manx Gaelic’. Journal of Celtic Linguistics 10 (2006): 85-120.
Lewin, Christopher (2011): ‘A Sermon in Manx translated from the work of Thomas
Wilson: text and commentary’. Scottish Gaelic Studies 28 (2011): 175-210.
EF - Stories of Edward Faragher (Ned Beg Hom Ruy), numbering follows
Broderick’s (1981-2) edition
FRC - Fer-raauee Creestee, edited by Robert Thomson (1998)
7