Bun as Bree 1
© Christopher Lewin 2011
Christopher Lewin
No. 1 - April 2011
A series of short articles on Manx Gaelic grammar, idiom, vocabulary
and pronunciation.
These little pieces, which I intend to produce every month, are aimed at intermediate-
advanced learners of Manx Gaelic and everyone who has an interest in the quirks of
the Manx language. Some of the things I will mention will be familiar to many
people, some to a few people, and some perhaps will not be widely known. I hope
these articles will be interesting, and please let me know if what I say is incorrect, or
if I have omitted something relevant.
In all the sections and tables below, most of the etymologies and examples in phonetic
transcription of native speakers are from George Broderick’s Handbook of Late
Spoken Manx; some are based on Irish and Scottish dictionaries and my own
suppositions. The symbol ´ after a consonant in the transcriptions indicates that that
consonant is slender or palatalized. Symbols in square brackets [] are in phonetic
transcriptions; letters in angle brackets <> are the English/Manx alphabet, so <y> and
[j] both indicate the sound at the beginning of English ‘yacht’ or Manx yiow.
My yuillyn vie:
Historically every consonant in Gaelic has a broad and a slender variant. In the
context of Manx the broad form is, in simple terms, the ‘neutral’ form while the
slender form is the palatalized variant—roughly speaking it has a <y> sound built into
it. In Irish and Scottish spelling the broad / slender distinction is integrated into the
spelling system, but in Manx it is more patchy. Sometimes an attempt is made to
show the distinction—for example in lioar the ‘i’ clearly shows the the ‘l’ is slender.
However, there are many cases of ambiguity and confusion where Manx spelling is
inadequate. We will look at a few of these cases in this article.
The letter ‘g’ in Manx at the beginnings of words often has an ‘i’ after it to show it is
slender:
giare (Gaelic: gearr), gial (Gaelic: geal) etc.
But what about the word guilley? The letter ‘u’ is often used in Manx spelling, and
also in Gaelic orthography, to show that a sound is broad: e.g. guin, guirr, guee, so it
seemed reasonable to me in learning Manx to assume that the purpose of the ‘u’ in
guilley is to stop you from thinking, on the basis of the following ‘i’, that the ‘g’ is
1
Bun as Bree 1
© Christopher Lewin 2011
slender. There seemed to be no other point to it. But you soon learn in Manx that the
spelling frequently doesn’t feel a need to follow logic: the ‘g’ is in fact slender, and
the ‘u’ seems to be following the English spelling rule in words like guest where the
‘u’ is to show that the ‘g’ is not ‘soft’, that is, pronounced as <j> (cf. the word
‘gesture’). But this is wholly unnecessary in Manx: g is almost always hard (cliegeen
and dangere notwithstanding) and there are scores of words beginning with ‘gi’ and
‘ge’ which have no ‘u’such as giare, gial, geddyn etc.
The ‘g’ in guilley is definitely slender / palatalized. We have cognate evidence: in
Irish we have giolla, in Scottish Gaelic gille. In both cases the ‘g’ is slender. We have
direct native speaker evidence; in Broderick’s dictionary most of the recorded native
speakers show palatalization of this ‘g’, a typical pronunciation being [g´ɪl´ə]. We
also have evidence from Ned Beg Hom Ruy and from Cregeen’s dictionary that I will
mention below.
Note that the palatalization is only slight and is part of the consonant; there should not
be a separate <y> sound (in IPA [j]) after the ‘g’, but rather a tinge of <y>, as it were,
built into the consonant itself. What palatalization really means is that the ‘g’ is
pronounced further forwards on the hard palate instead of the soft palate (or velum).
Sounds produced on the hard palate automatically have a <y> tinge.
The real relevance of all this becomes apparent when guilley is lenited. Thinking the
‘g’ to be broad, I and probably many other people, have tended to say things like my
ghuilley with a gutteral <gh> [ɣ] sound like in ghooinney or ghow, whereas it is
actually the <y> sound of the lenited forms of giare and gial, namely yiare and yial:
so in the song Arrane Oie Vie we should sing my yuillyn vie, not *ghuillyn.
This is proved by Cregeen with the help of his very useful indications of mutations.
Although he does give ghuilley (since gh is sometimes used to spell both
pronunciations, even in ghiare etc.), he also gives yuilley. In addition, he has yuiy as
the lenition of guiy ‘goose’, which is to be expected because this word too has an
etymologically slender ‘g’, cf. Ir. gé, Sc. gèadh. and the majority of the
pronunciations given by Broderick show palatal [g´] or [gj]. It is important to note
that Cregeen gives no cases of ‘y’ where we would expect the broad ‘gh’, so it is
reasonable to trust that where he gives ‘y’, it was pronounced as such. Note also
forms in Cregeen such as dy yigleragh ‘to giggle’ and e yimmagh ‘his lobster’, which
again correspond with the correct pronunciation of these lenited forms.
There is a smoking gun in the work of Ned Beg Hom Ruy. He only vaguely sticks to
Bible spellings and generally reflects closely his pronunciation in his spelling. For
example, he writes dy chra instead of dy hraa, which reflects that [h] had become [x]
(the gutteral sound in Scottish loch) before [r]. He consistently writes gilley without
the ‘u’, and for the lenited form, he has yn chen yilley for yn shenn ghuilley.
Spelling reform / standardization?
We have tended to avoid spelling reform like the plague for fear of confusing or
putting off learners. This is certainly a valid concern, and one I share; hence a wide-
ranging reform is probably not a good idea. However, I think there is a case for some
2
Bun as Bree 1
© Christopher Lewin 2011
small reforms / standardizations in a small number of words where the existing forms
are particularly confusing for learners.
So I make two tentative proposals, the second more tentative than the first:
1)	Standardization of the spellings ‘gh’ and ‘y’
I don’t expect this to be contentious, since we largely do it already: we should make a
firm distinction between ‘gh’ and ‘y’ in spelling the lenited form of ‘g’. ‘Gh’ should
be used always and only when it is pronounced broad, in words like gharroo (Gaelic:
gharbh), ghoo (ghuth), gherrid (ghoirid), gherrym (ghairm) whereas y should be used
always and only when it is slender, e.g. yiare (ghearr), yimmagh (ghiomach), yial
(gheal), yennal [gheanail] and including yuilley (ghille) and yuiy (ghèadh). (For
readers not familiar with Gaelic spelling, don’t be deceived by the fact that Gaelic
always uses the spelling ‘gh’. The slender form is still pronounced roughly <y>; it is
the consistent use of following ‘i’ or ‘e’ that tells you to pronounce the ‘gh’ slender.
The lack of this consistency in Manx orthography is the reason why we need to mark
the difference in the consonant itself.) Spellings like ghuilley should be avoided
because they are traps tempting us into an incorrect pronunciation.
I think this change, and some similar ones, such as standardizing the difference
between ‘d-’ and ‘j-’ in the past tense (see below), are necessary because Manx
spelling has a different purpose today from when it was invented. In the eighteenth
century it was used mainly by clergymen writing sermons etc. for their own use; they
were native speakers, or at least familar with the native speech that was all around
them, so they did not need an accurate spelling system because they knew very well
how to pronounce the language. For example, mutations did not necessarily have to
be represented consistently because they were an automatic adjustment made in
reading aloud. Today there are no native speakers and we are all learners, so an
accurate representation of mutations etc. is much more important. That is why we
need to be clearer in our spellings than the translators of the Bible needed to be in
their own age.
2)	Abolition of the ‘u’ in guilley, guiy and guess
We should follow Ned Beg in writing gilley. Guiy could be replaced by geiy. And we
would hardly notice if guess (‘charm’, G. geas), which is a rare word anyway, became
gess.
I imagine this proposal will be more contentious, since guilley is a very common
word, and I have reservations about changing it myself. Nevertheless let us not reject
this idea without consideration: getting rid of a single letter would simplify the
spelling of this word and save generations of future students much confusion. Of
course, since there is no official standard, individuals can spell Manx however they
like (within reason and within the bounds of comprehensibility), and perhaps this
proposal will find favour with some. It is not without precedent: many extraneous h’s
have disappeared over the years, and most people now write cliejeen and danjeyr,
despite the fact that cliegeen and dangere appear in the Bible.
3
Bun as Bree 1
© Christopher Lewin 2011
Yn before slender vowels:
The quality of the ‘n’ in the definite article yn depends upon the following vowel. If
the following vowel is slender, the ‘n’ will have a palatal quality. The problem is that
this is not always shown in Manx spelling. In yn arragh, for example, there is no
indication that the quality of the ‘n’ is any different from in yn arrys. Gaelic spelling
is much clearer: the ‘e’ in an earrach (which is otherwise silent) shows the palatal
quality of the ‘n’, whereas there is no ‘e’ in an aithreachas. It is clear, however, that
this distinction was live and well in native speech, even to some extent into the 20th
century on the evidence of Broderick’s transcriptions (see below); and the eighteenth
century writers sometimes wrote things like yn niarragh (for yn arragh ‘the spring’),
yn niagh (for yn agh ‘the horse’) and y niarn (for yn ayrn ‘the part’). The slender n is
even preserved in the famous Manx place-name Niarbyl, which is really yn arbyl ‘the
tail’ (referring to the shape of the rocks that stick out into the sea), in Gaelic
orthography an earball.
Below I list the commonest nouns that should, based on etymology, cause the ‘n’ in
yn to be slender. Since this distinction appears on the evidence given above to have
been well preserved in Manx, I recommend learners to consciously learn and
systematically apply the rule. Thus before the similar-looking nouns oard ‘hammer’
and oarn ‘barley’, which are etymologically órd and eórn with a broad / slender
distinction the ‘n’ of the article should be realized differently:
yn oard as yn oarn - the hammer and the barley *ən ɔ:rd̪ as ən´ ɔ:rn
Very roughly speaking, then, we should say yn yoarn, yn yaggle, yn yagglish etc., but
bearing in mind that it is not with a separate <y> sound. Remember it is part of the
<n> consonant.
aggle - ‘fear’ (Sc. eagal)
agglish - ‘church’ (eaglais)
agh - ‘horse’ (each) (spelt yn niagh - Proverbs 21:31, Zech. 10:3, Job 39:19)
arbyl - ‘tail’ (earball) (Ned Maddrell: yn Niarbyl - [ən N´a:bəl]
arragh - ‘spring’ (earrach) (yn niarragh - Exodus 24:31) (Ned Maddrell: [o̤ zi N´arax])
askaid - ‘boil, ulcer’ (Sc. neasgaid)
aspick - ‘bishop’ (Sc. easbuig) (Harry Boyd: son yn aspick - [sɑ̜ nɪn N´ɑ:spɪt´])
assag - ‘weasel’ (Sc. easag)
ayrn - ‘part’ (Sc. earrann) (y Niarn - Coyrle Sodjeh p. 27)
oarn - ‘barley’ (Ir. eorna)
oayll, oalys - ‘knowledge, magic spell’ (Ir. eolas)
ollagh - ‘cattle’ (Ir. eallach) (Thomas Christian: yn ollagh - [n´ɔlɑx])
ollay (pronounced ‘olla’, ought to be written olley) - ‘swan’ (Ir. eala)
Most of the nouns beginning in ‘e’ and ‘i’ in Manx spelling will also be slender, but
note the exceptions: eaghtyr (uachtar), eairk (adharc), earroo (àireamh), eayl (aol),
eayn (uan), eaynagh (aonach), edd (ad), eiyrt (adhart), enney, ennaghtyn, ainjys
(aithne), ennal (anal), ennym (ainm), eoylley (aoileach), erin (aifreann), erreeish
(aircheas), eulys (aimhleas).
4
Bun as Bree 1
© Christopher Lewin 2011
Note in passing the difference between the similar-looking words eulys ‘anger’ and
eunys ‘joy’. ‘The anger’ would be [ən euləs] with an [eu] sound (roughly like a
Liverpool pronunciation of the vowel in ‘boat’ or ‘moan’, or like Welsh mewn or
Classical Greek εὔ) and no palatalization of yn, whereas ‘the joy’ would be [ən´
ju:nəs], cf. Scottish Gaelic èibhneas, a variant of aoibhneas, since most combinations
with bh or mh in Gaelic give [u:] sounds in Manx, sometimes [eu] and [au].
In the absence of Manx native speakers, a little knowledge of Irish and Scottish
Gaelic is very useful to give clues to work out what Manx spelling is supposed to
represent.
Unfortunately, there is no way Manx spelling as it stands could be changed to show
the sort of invisible slenderness in arragh, ollagh etc. You just have to learn them.
d- and j- in the past tense:
A similar issue is the prefix d- which is applied to the past tense of verbs beginning
with vowels and ‘f-’. This prefix is either broad or slender depending on whether it is
followed by a broad or slender vowel in Gaelic. That this distinction was maintained
in Manx is shown by the spellings such as jimmee in the Bible and jynsee in ‘Coyrle
Sodjeh’ (p. 46).
Slender d- is also attested in native speech: Joseph Woodworth has [d´ʒɪri] as the past
tense of irree which Broderick spells jirree and Ned Maddrell has a slender ‘d’ in
[d´iri] (spelt dirree). On the other hand, Thomas Christian has [dik] for the past tense
of eeck (deeck), and Woodworth has [di:nʃ] for the past of insh (dinsh), with failure of
palatalization in both cases. This may be due to the infrequency of these forms and
resulting confusion about whether they are broad or slender; in the case of dinsh there
may also be an element of dissimilation away from a palatalized realization due to the
presence of the palatal <sh> at the end of the word. Cregeen however, gives jeeck and
also jetlee (for Biblical deeck and dettyl), and also jaggle(e) ‘frightened’, Ir.
d’eaglaigh, which shows that in the nineteenth century Manx preserved the slender
pronunciation even when the following vowel was not obviously slender. All in all,
the evidence suggests that where a broad or slender d- is to be expected
etymologically, it occurred, and therefore I would recommend learners today to be
systematic in making this distinction too. As to why the spelling ‘d-’ is preferred in
both cases, perhaps this is due to standardization: the Bible editors recognized the two
variants as a single prefix with a single meaning—past tense—and therefore
generalized, much as in English we always write the past ending as ‘-ed’ even though
it has three pronunciations (or allomorphs), viz. jumpt, climbd and patted. Or perhaps
it is because the pronunciation, at least sometimes and in some cases, tended towards
a palatal ‘d’ [d´] rather than a full affricate [dʒ] (a combination of a <d> and a voiced
<sh> sound), as in English ‘jug’ or Manx jouyl. Ned Maddrell’s pronunciation, as
well as any tendency to lose palatalization altogether, might support this.
I am not too bothered whether we pronounce, say, dynsee/jynsee with [d´] or [dʒ], so
long as is distinct from the broad [d̪ ]. The latter in turn should not be the same as the
English [d] sound, which is alveolar, meaning the tongue presses against the gum
ridge behind the upper teeth: the Manx [d̪ ] is dental, meaning the tongue is pressed
against the upper teeth themselves—the difference in sound is quite noticeable.
5
Bun as Bree 1
© Christopher Lewin 2011
Conscious knowledge of the distinction is important in cases where Manx spelling is
ambiguous, such as in dennee ‘felt’ and deie ‘cried’. Dennee in Gaelic orthography
would be d’aithnigh, with the ‘a’ indicating the ‘d’ should be broad; eie on the other
other hand would be d’éigh, where the ‘é’ indicates that the ‘d’ is slender.
Because today’s Manx speakers and learners do not have mother-tongue knowledge
of what the correct pronunciation is, it is important the ambiguities of the spelling be
removed as far as possible; therefore I recommend that the distinction between d- and
j-, which already exists haphazardly in Manx spelling, be made systematic, so that one
would continue to write dennee, but deie would become jeie etc. Wherever the
etymology tells us there is a broad vowel, write d-; wherever etymology tells us there
is a slender vowel, write j-.
I hope the following table, which includes the commonest verbs beginning with a
vowel, will be helpful:
etymologically broad	Irish / Scottish cognate	etymologically slender	Irish / Scottish cognate
daag ‘left’ < faag, -ail	fág	jagglee ‘frightened’ < agglee, -aghey	eagal
daarlee ‘cooked’ < aarlee, -aghey	O.Ir. airlam	jeaisht ‘listened’ < eaisht(agh)	éist
daase ‘grew’ < aase	(f)ás	jeddrymmee	Ir. éadtrom, but Sc. aotrom
daill ‘hired’ < faill(ey)	Sc. faichill	jee ‘ate’ < ee	ith
dansoor ‘answered’ < ansoor	[Eng. answer]	jeearree ‘desired’ < yeearree	iarraidh
dark(ee) ‘waited’ < fark(ee), farkiagh	? Ir. faircsin	jeeassee ‘borrowed’ < eeassee, eeassaghey	Ir. iasacht
darr ‘continued, lasted’ < farr, farraghtyn	Sc. fairich	jeebree ‘exiled’ < eebree, eebyrt	Sc. diobradh
darree ‘moved’ < arree, arraghey	Sc. atharraich	jeeck ‘paid’ < eeck	íoc
deayshil ‘untied, released’ < feayshil, feaysley	fuascail	jeginee ‘forced’ < eginee, -aghey	Sc. èiginn
deiyr ‘followed’ < eiyr(t)	Sc. adhart	jeie ‘cried’ < eie	éigh
denee ‘ask’ < fenee, -aght	Sc. faighnich	jettyl ‘flew’ < ettyl, etlagh	Ir. eiteall
denmys ‘named’ < enmys	ainm	jan ‘flayed’ < fan(ney)	feann
dennee ‘felt’ < ennee, -aghtyn	Sc. aithnich	jill ‘folded’ < fill(ey)	Ir. fill
datt ‘swelled’ < att	at	jimman ‘drove’ < imman	Sc. iomain
doad ‘kindled, lit’ < foad(dey)	Ir. fadaigh	jimmee ‘departed’ < immee, -aght	Ir. imthigh
doanluck ‘buried’ < oanluck(ey)	adhlac	jimraa ‘mentioned’ < imraa	Ir. iomrádh
doardee ‘ordered’ < oardee, oardaghey	Ir. ordaigh	jinjillee ‘lowered’ < injillee, -aghey	Sc. ìslich
dob ‘denied’ < obb, obbal	Ir. ob	jinsh ‘told’ < insh	inis
dockle ‘uttered’ < fockle, fockley	focal	jirree ‘rose’ < irree	éirigh
dod ‘was able’ < foddee	prob. broad, cf. Sc. faod, but Ir. féad	jiu ‘drank’ < iu	ibh
dolmee ‘emptied’ < folmee, -aghey	Ir. folamh	joonlee ‘washed’ < oonlee, oonlaghey	Sc. ionnlaich
doshil ‘opened’ < foshil, fosley	Ir. foscail	jyll(ee) ‘cried’ < yllee, -agh(ey)	Sc. iolach
dosnee ‘sighed’ < osnee, -aghey	Ir. osnaigh	jymmyrk ‘carried’ < ymmyrk(ey)	Ir. iomchar
6
Bun as Bree 1
© Christopher Lewin 2011
dreggyr ‘replied’ < freggyr(t)	freagair (in Manx, d and t are always broad before r)	jymmyrt ‘rowed’ < ymmyrt	Sc. iomairt
dreill ‘kept’ < freill, freayll	Ir. friotháil	jynsee ‘learnt’ < ynsee, -aghey	Sc. ionnsaich
duillee ‘suffered’ < fuillee, fuillaghtyn	fulaing		
duinn ‘baked’ < fuinn(ey)	fuin		
duirree ‘stayed’ < fuirree, -aghtyn	Sc. fuirich		
The practice of inserting an apostrophe after the d- or j-, while being etymologically
justifiable, since the d- is originally an abbreviation of a particle do which still
survives in full in some dialects of Irish and in the dependent past in Scottish Gaelic,
is not common or necessary, and therefore need not concern us.
eo(y)
This combination is a variant of <eay> and should be so pronounced. Beoyn is
probably something like ‘beeyn’, not ‘byoan’; this is confirmed by evidence from
poetry where it rhymes with pian (Pargys Caillit l. 2390; though it also seems to
rhyme with resoon in l. 2807: perhaps it varied like feayr which can be feeyr or fooyr)
Note the following words, with pronunciation from native speakers (Broderick,
Handbook of Late Spoken Manx):
eoylley	e:l´ə	freoagh	fri:x
feoh	fi:ə	beoyn	(not attested in speech)
Word building:
Words for asking:
Brie-briaght and fenee-fenaght are basically synonymous and interchangeable. Both
take jeh to refer to the person you are asking.
Nee’m briaght jeh cre’n traa t’eh - I’ll ask him what time it is
Fenee jeh vel eh goll magh noght - Ask him if he’s going out tonight
Feysht, which functions as a noun meaning question (though queshtan / question is
more common, cf. ansoor), is also a verbal noun meaning to examine. Here is an
example from the Bible:
Eisht daag adsyn eh er-y-chooyl va ry-hoi feysht eh - Then straightway they departed
from him which should have examined him [then they who were to examine him left
him straightaway] (Acts 22:29)
If you are asking for something, use shir er:
shir er girree - ask him to rise (cf. 2 Kings 9:2)
ta’n mac shirrey arran er e ayr - the son asks his father for bread (cf. Luke 11:11)
7
Bun as Bree 1
© Christopher Lewin 2011
Note that briaght also has another meaning. In the phrasal verb cur briaght er, it has
nothing to do with asking, but means ‘discover, reveal, find out (in the sense of ‘they
found him out’), rumble (‘they rumbled us)’:
Nish va chammah ny ard-saggyrtyn as ny Phariseeyn er chur sarey, my va fys ec
dooinney erbee c’raad v’eh, dy row ad dy choyrt briaght er cour y ghoaill eh. Now
both the chief priests and the Pharisees had given a commandment, that, if any man
knew where he were, he should shew it, that they might take him (John 11:57)
gowee eh kerraghey er dty vee-chairys, O inneen Edom, ver eh briaght er dty
pheccaghyn - he will visit thine iniquity, O daughter of Edom; he will discover thy
sins (Lamentations 4:22)
Curse not the king, no not in thy thought; and curse not the rich in thy bedchamber:
for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which hath wings shall tell the
matter - Ny jean y ree y oltooan, eer ayns dty smooinaghtyn, as ny loayr dy olk jeh
deiney ooasle ayns dty hiamyr lhiabbagh: son nee eean jeh’n aer yn coraa y chur lesh,
as ver yn skianagh briaght er y chooish (Ecclesiastes 10:20)
This use of briaght is, I suspect, probably related to brah ‘to betray, reveal’. To make
it impersonal, you can use çheet or ve:
Tra cheayll Saul dy row briaght er David, as er ny deiney va marish - When Saul
heard that David was discovered, and the men that were with him (1 Samuel 22:6)
yn nah laa erreish da v’er varroo Gedaliah, as nagh row briaght er jeet er - the
second day after he had slain Gedaliah, and no man knew it (Jeremiah 41:4)
Roish my daink briaght er dty ghrogh-yannoo - Before thy wickedness was
discovered (Ezekiel 16:57)
It is easy to see how this idiom could be useful in contemporary Manx. Imagine
saying / writing things like:
Haink briaght er y cho-chialg - The plot was rumbled
Haink briaght er y chooish - The matter was found out / discovered
Do not confuse this with jannoo briaght er or briaght er / son which mean ‘ask for’ in
the sense of inquiring after someone.
Proverb of the Month:
Cha dennee rieau yn soogh y shang - The full belly never felt for the hungered
8