Christopher Lewin
No. 7 - October 2011
A series of short articles on Manx Gaelic grammar, idiom,
vocabulary and pronunciation.
This month, some notes on stress and emphasis.
Emphatic suffixes and pronouns
These are ’s, ’s, -syn, (i)sh, -yn, -syn, according to person and number:
my hie’s - MY house
e vacsyn - HIS son
y thie aym’s - MY house
y thie echeysyn - HIS house
Beem’s - I will be
dooinyn - to US
In late Manx, y thie aym’s etc. would be more common than my hie’s, but the point is
that the use of the emphatic suffixes, wherever they occur, is very common. They are
not in any way an optional extra; to sound natural they should be used copiously
(though not totally indiscriminately, as we shall see). In English however, most of
their function is taken by intonation, and you will hear learners applying this
incorrectly to Manx.
For example:
T’eh cummal ayns y thie AYM (as cha nee thie elley) - He lives in MY house (and
not another one)
where emphasis is put on aym, but without the suffix ’s that would be expected. Ayns
y thie AYM just sounds odd, but
T’eh cummal ayns MY hie (cha nee e thie / y thie eck)
with stress on my is just plain wrong. It is absolutely impossible and un-Gaelic to
stress possessives like my, dty, and e, because they are clitics, or words which cannot
be stressed and must be connected to a stressed word. Other such unstressable clitics
include the definite article yn, and preverbal particles such as cha, nagh and dy.
The use of suffixes instead of intonation is one of the most alien things about Gaelic
to English speakers, because it simply doesn’t occur to us to do it that way. It took me
a while to get my head round it. Even if you do use ’s and say my hie’s, there is still
an urge from an English-speaking perspective to emphasize my with the voice,
whereas my hie and my hie’s are both stressed on the second word and have about the
same intonation—the emphasis is shown by the suffix.
The personal pronouns mee, oo, eh, ee, shin, shiu, ad, and the prepositional forms
aym, dou, rhyt… etc. are not actually unstressed forms, but it is odd to stress them
emphatically, the forms mish, uss etc. should be used liberally.
When there is contrast, emphatic forms are effectively obligatory:
Shoh yn thie aym’s, as shen y thie ecksh1 - This is MY house, and that is HER house
mish as eshyn - me and him (I and he)
Though forms with hene can also be used:
mee-hene as eh-hene
However, there are certain circumstances where learners are wont to overuse the
emphatic forms where they are not usual, or not obligatory:
1.	relative clauses with pronouns:
yn dooinney rish va mee loayrt - the man I was talking to
is more common than
2
yn dooinney rishyn va mee loayrt2
Examples:
Cre vel screeuyn-scarree nyn moir, r’ee ta mee er scarrey - Where is the bill of your
mother's divorcement, whom I have put away? (Isaiah 50:1)
ny greeshyn orroo hie eh seose gys thie’n Chiarn - his ascent [the stairs] by which he
went up into the house of the Lord (2 Chronicles 9:4)
1 Note in passing that it is normal in Manx to repeat the noun, i.e. to say ‘my house and her house’,
which is avoided in English, rather than ‘my house and her one / hers’. E.g. FRC p. 66 Ta e ailleil hene
ec dy chooilley ghooinney, as she shoh my ailleil’s ‘Every Man has his Failing, and this is mine’.
2 the like of which nevertheless does occur in the Bible and elsewhere, see Daniel 11:39, Amos 6:1
2.	coordinate clauses with as
honnick mee eh as eh çheet magh ass y cheeill - I saw him as / when he was coming
out of church
would be odd as …as eshyn çheet magh… because the emphatic could imply we were
talking about to separate masculine individuals.
Examples:
Ny tra ta’n spyrryd dy eadaghey dy ghoaill eh, as eh geadaghey mysh e ven… Or
when the spirit of jealousy cometh upon him, and he be jealous over his wife…
(Numbers 5:30)
As shen myr ve, as ee markiagh er yn assyl, myr haink ee sheese er lhiattee’n clieau…
And it was so, as she rode on the ass, that she came down by the covert on the hill (1
Samuel 25:20)
quoi ren rieau cherraghtyn, as eh gyn-loght? - who ever perished, being innocent?
(Job 4:7)
3.	subject of the copula
Usually in the non-emphatic form:
She Manninagh mee - I am a Manxman
rather than
? She Manninagh mish
Examples:
She voalley mee, as ta my cheeaghyn myr tooryn - I am a wall, and my breasts like
towers (Song of Solomon 8:10)
Agh my she phadeyryn ad, as my ta goo yn Chiarn mâroo - But if they be prophets,
and if the word of the Lord be with them (Jeremiah 27:18)
Much of the use of emphatic suffixes depends on training your mind to think in Manx,
rather than English. But with familiarity and awareness, you will soon get the hang of
it and before long *Nee shoh yn thie ayd? (‘Is this YOUR house?’, where the enquiry
is whether it is your house rather than someone else’s) will grate on you, and Nee
shoh yn thie ayd’s? will sound natural.
The clitic preverbal particles
These particles are always unstressed and must be followed by a verb, which is why
you cannot say *cha on its own to mean ‘not’ or ‘no’. The same applies to nagh.
Which is why * Cre’n fa nagh? (‘Why not?’) is ungrammatical and should be
avoided. It is impossible to say *Cre’n fa nagh? in Manx in just the same way as it is
impossible to say *the on its own without a following noun in English (whereas this is
permissible in some languages, such as German, where it means ‘the one’).
Nagh needs a verb, so:
A:	Vel oo goll magh noght? - Are you going out tonight?
B:	Cha nel. - No. [=Am not.]
A. Cre’n fa nagh vel? - Why not? [=Why are not?]
A:	Cha dug mee feeyn da. - I didn’t give him wine.
B:	Cre’n fa nagh dug? - Why not? [=Why not gave?]
This is a different way of thinking from what English-speakers are used to, but with a
little practice you come to feel nagh to be naked, as it were, or incomplete without a
following verb. The same applies in other circumstances:
A:	Cha daink mee thie riyr. - I didn’t come home last night.
B:	Ta fys aym nagh daink. - I know that you didn’t [=that did not come].
Other points
It is impressed on learners that words like thalloo have stress on the first syllable, not
the last, as might be expected from the spelling. Indeed, most words in Manx stressed
on the first syllable, unless a later syllable has a long vowel ending in a consonant
(more or less). So the genitive thallooin is stressed on the second syllable, but
nominative thalloo on the first.
Chamoo ‘neither’, on the other hand, is stressed on the second syllable, because it is
really cha moo ‘no more’ with the unstressed particle cha followed by the
comparative of mooar. The subordinate / relative form nagh moo, which occurs in
Wilson’s sermons (pp. 61, 89), makes this clear. Perhaps it would be better if cha moo
were so written as two words.
Scadoo ‘shadow’ is also stressed on the second syllable (see stress marking in
Cregeen and HLSM II p. 386 [skəˈdøu] TC) because it is originally scaa doo ‘black
shadow’.
Whilleen, according to Cregeen, is pronounced WHILLin, with stress on the first
syllable resulting in shortening of the long vowel in the second syllable.
Proverb of the Month:
Ta mee er y vaarney veayl.
I am on the bare gap, i.e., I am at the end of my tether. (Manx Proverbs and Sayings)