Christopher Lewin
No. 14 - May-June 2012
A Guide to Resources
Many resources for studying the native Manx language are available, including
several on the internet, but some of them are not widely known. Here is a guide to the
most important. The links are valid at time of writing, but may change.
Manx Language Project - Manx Heritage Foundation
http://www.mannin.info/MHF/
This extremely important website includes the whole of the Manx Bible (1819/1979
edition) and a dictionary containing Kelly and some of Cregeen.
The Bible is fully searchable, including for phrases and mutated forms, and includes
the English King James version side by side with the Manx text.
The dictionary is also searchable, but only from Manx into English.
Although extremely useful, there are a few glitches. There are a number of typos in
the Bible, and occasionally more serious mistakes, though in an undertaking of this
size that is hardly to be avoided and they do not seriously impede the user if handled
with care. Also you cannot search for words of three letters or less, or anything
including apostrophes.
The dictionary crashes if you try to look at the entries for words with çh in them.
Ynsee Gaelg
http://www.learnmanx.com/
The Manx Heritage Foundation’s ‘Learn Manx’ website contains a number of
resources.
To get round some of the deficiencies of the online Bible discussed above, a PDF of
the whole Bible with the English version is available here, under ‘News’ and then
‘Stories’. ‘The Bible in Manx Gaelic’ is one of many titles which can be clicked on on
this page. Searching in this version is less sophisticated than in the Manx Language
Project site, but you can search for short words and words with apostrophes, and also
some of the errors have been corrected here.
A searchable PDF version of Coyrle Sodjeh, Bishop Wilson’s catechism of 1707 and
the first book printed in Manx, is available on this page as well. It was done by myself
and is in standardized spelling. Only the Manx text is included. Another interesting
item is ‘the Trial of John Barlecorn’, transcribed by Chris Sheard from a manuscript
by J. T. Clarke. The same page also contains a large number of contemporary texts,
including my own translation of Voltaire’s Candide.
On the page ‘Skeet’, back-issues of Bun as Bree are available, as well as my bilingual
articles in the Isle of Man Examiner, issues of Gaelg Vio and other news items. Under
‘Multimedia’ and ‘Recordings Archive’, there are many interesting recordings,
including Ned Maddrell, and past episodes of Manx Radio and the BBC’s
programmes Jamys Jeheiney and Traa dy Liooar.
Google Books
http://books.google.co.uk
The internet search company Google has a project to make freely available out of
print and obscure books in electronic format by scanning volumes in libraries around
the world. A number of Manx volumes are available, scanned from copies held in
places such as the Bodleian Library in Oxford. By careful to search for the titles of the
books with the dates, for many other editions are available, most of them not
containing Manx.
These include:
Sharmaneyn. Lioar 1 by Thomas Wilson 1783.
22 sermons by Bishop Wilson, translated into Manx and published in 1783. The
sermons run to some four hundred pages of Manx prose and are written in generally
good Manx, and contain many words and idioms not found or rarely found elsewhere,
as well as colloquialisms. A linguistic commentary of one of these sermons (no. 10)
by myself has been published in the journal Scottish Gaelic Studies 28 pp. 175-210.
The original English versions of the sermons are also available from Google Books, in
vol. 1 (1-8, 9, 10, 15, 16, 19, 20, 24), vol. 2 (26, 31, 37, 38), vol. 3 (58, 71, 74) and
vol. 4 (76).
A short and plain instruction for the better understanding of the Lord’s supper by
Thomas Wilson 1777.
This is a bilingual edition of another of Bishop Wilson’s books, again written in good
Manx prose.
The Book of common prayer, tr. into Manx 1777.
Includes a collection of metrical psalms and a couple of hymns.
Lioar dy hymnyn: as arraneyn spyrrydoil, chyndait gys Gailck, veih Lioaryn Wesley
as Watts 1799.
Manx methodist hymn book, containing a large number of hymns, moslty translated
to a high standard.
Aght giare dy heet gys Tushtey as Toiggal jeh’n chredjue Chreestee ayns daa ayrn by
John Clague 1814.
Another catechism, written in good idiomatic Manx, most notable for the large
number of traditional names for religious festivals. The original English version is
also available, as ‘An Introduction to the knowledge of the Christian religion in two
parts’ by H Crossman, but incorrectly referenced as ‘Brossman’ in Google.
A practical grammar of the antient Gaelic: or language of the Isle of Man, Volume 2,
by John Kelly
John Kelly’s pioneering grammar.
The Manx Bible and Cregeen’s dictionary are also available on Google Books.
Archive.org
Moore/Rhys edition of Phillip’s (c. 1610) translation of the Book of Common Prayer
This is the earliest body of Manx prose in existence. The two volumes are available;
search for the following identifier codes:
Vol. 1: cu31924093598203
Vol. 2: cu31924093598211
Volume 1 contains the orders for the services through the year and the readings for
them, while volume 2 contains the psalms and Rhys’s Outlines of the Phonology of
Manx Gaelic.
Skeealyn Aesop: a Selection of Aesops Fables: Translated Into Manx-Gaelic,
Together with a Few Poems (1901).
These fables were translated by Edward Faragher (Ned Beg Hom Ruy).
Identifier: skeealynaesopas00farqgoog
Bun as Bree
This may be the last Bun as Bree for a while, as I have a number of other projects and
have run short of ideas for topics! But please get in touch if there is any particular
subject that you think should be covered, and I will endeavour to deal with them in
the future.
Manx magazine
It is hoped that a magazine in Manx will soon be established, to come out once or
twice a year. This is to provide an outlet for shorter pieces of writing in Manx, mostly
factual, though stories and verse would also be welcomed. If you would like to
contribute please contact myself or James O’Meara (who will be the editors), or the
Manx Language Officer Adrian Cain. Essays, articles and stories between 500 and
5000 words (basically write as much or as little as you feel comfortable with) are
sought, and hopefully this will get off the ground in the autumn (2012). If you are not
fully confident writing in Manx, do not be deterred, for we will go over what you
have written and help you. Alternatively, write in English and we would be happy to
translate it into Manx.
Proverbs:
Share goll dy lhie fegooish shibber na girree ayns lhiastynys. - Better to go to bed
without supper than to get up in debt.
Foddee yn moddey s’jerree tayrtyn y mwaagh. - The last dog may catch the hare.