Christopher Lewin
No. 9 - Decmber 2011
A series of short articles on Manx Gaelic grammar, idiom,
vocabulary and pronunciation.
Relatives
This month we will look at various issues involving the relative form the verb and
relative clauses.
In all tenses apart from the future, the positive form of the relative is the same as the
independent, but in the future these is a special form with lenition and ending in -ys.
The negative in all tenses has nagh plus the dependent form of the verb:
ta	nagh vel
va	nagh row
veagh	nagh beagh
vees	nagh bee
chaill
chaillagh
chaillys
nagh chaill
nagh gaillagh
nagh gaill
In English, relative clauses are introduced by relative pronouns who, which and that
(e.g. the cat that sat on the mat). Subordinate clauses (e.g. I know that he is ill) can
also be introduced by ‘that’. In Manx positive subordinate clauses of this kind are
introduced by dy plus dependent. This can make for confusion: relatives and
subordinates must be kept separate in Manx. For example,
* paart dy reddyn dy noddagh oo jannoo er my hon - some things that you could do
for me
is ungrammatical. It should be, and can only be
paart dy reddyn oddagh oo jannoo er my hon
with the relative (here same as independent) form of the verb. In the negative, there
can be no such confusion, for nagh is used in both relatives and subordinates.
Another sources of confusion from English is the fact that, in some circumstances,
both relative and subordinate clauses can appear without that.
I know he’s coming
the man you didn’t see
But in Manx the relative or subordinate forms cannot be dropped:
* Ta fys aym t’eh çheet is wrong (It must be, Ta fys aym dy vel eh çheet)
* yn dooinney cha vaik oo is also wrong (It must be, yn dooinney nagh vaik oo)
The generalizing relative
A further source of confusion from Manx itself is that there is in fact a kind of relative
clause which uses dy plus dependent verb. The dy in the ‘generalizing relative’ is,
however, historically different from the dy of subordinate clauses. The generalizing
relative dy is originally a prepositional element from jeh / dy ‘of’ (Irish dá), whereas
the subordinate dy (earler Manx gy) is cognate with the Irish conjunction go.
The generalizing relative is only used after erbee or veg ‘any’, or when the sense of
‘any’ is understood. It is most familiar from expressions such as keayrt dy row ‘once
upon a time’, laa dy row ‘one day’, dooinney dy row ‘a certain man’. The idea behind
it is ‘out of those that…’, so dooinney erbee elley dy vel bio (Daniel 2:30) is ‘any
other man out of those who are alive’ i.e. ‘any other man who is alive’.
Examples of the generalizing relative:
meerioose jeh nyn yoin er currym erbee dy vel fyss eu er - the wilful Neglect of any
known Duty [any duty that you know] (FRC p. 62-3)
Vel Jee erbee cheu-mooie jeem’s? dy firrinagh-focklagh, cha vel Jee erbee elley dy
nhione dooys - Is there a God beside me? yea, there is no God; I know not any [that I
know] (Isaiah 44:8)
raad erbee dy vaik oo mie as jesh dhyt hene, gow dty chummal ayns shen - whither
[wherever] it seemeth good and convenient for thee to go, thither go [dwell there]
(Jeremiah 40:4)
cha vel y folliaght shoh er ny hoilshaghey dooys, son veg y chreenaght dy vel aym’s
erskyn dooinney erbee elley dy vel bio - this secret is not revealed to me for any
wisdom that I have more than any living [that are alive] (Daniel 2:30)
ard-valley ny balley erbee dy jed shiu stiagh ayn - into whatsoever city or town ye
shall enter (Mian 10:11)
Eisht cheayll mee noo loayrt, as dooyrt noo dy row rish yn noo shen ren loayrt - Then
I heard one saint speaking, and another saint [a certain saint] said unto that certain
saint [that saint] which spake (Daniel 8:13)
va deiney dy row va jeant neughlen liorish bentyn rish corp dooinney marroo - there
were certain men, who were defiled by [touching] the dead body of a man (Numbers
9:6)
Son va shin hene myrgeddin keayrt dy row mee-hushtagh, mee-viallagh, ayns
marranys… - For we ourselves also were sometimes [once, at one time] foolish,
disobedient, deceived… (Titus 3:3)
O Chreenaght insh dooin! cha vel [dhyt] gyn-yss / nhee dy row rieau, dy bee, ny dy
vel nish - O Wisdom tell us! nothing is unknown to you that ever was, that will be, or
that is now (Pargys Caillit ll. 25-6)
The most important thing to note is that relatives of the type dy vel are highly
restricted in their use, and can never be used instead of ordinary relatives.
Relative pronouns
Generally there are no relative pronouns in Manx, the relative form of the verb being
used instead. Ny is not a general relative pronoun; it means ‘what’ in the sense of ‘that
which’.
Ny ta scruit aym, te scruit - What I have written I have written [it is written] (John
19:22)
It is, however, used after ooilley when followed by a relative clause:
ooilley ny ta son goll magh gys caggey ayns Israel - all that are able to go forth to war
in Israel (Numbers 1:3)
In imitation of English, the interrogative pronoun quoi ‘who’ is occasionally pressed
into service as a relative pronoun, but this appears to be due to slavish translation and
was never natural in the language. It should be avoided.
One example will suffice:
Son cha vel geill oc da cairys, ta’n Chiarn dy ghra; quoi ta stoyral seose berchys ayns
nyn blaaseyn liorish tranlaase as roosteyrys - For they know not to do right, saith the
Lord, who store up violence and robbery in their palaces (Amos 3:10)
The complex and unfamiliar sentence structure has thrown the translator. A more
normal Manx translation would be cha vel geill ocsyn da cairys, ta’n Chiarn dy ghra,
ta stoyral seose…
Relative clauses with prepositions
In classical Manx the preposition agrees with the antecedent in number and gender,
and can precede the relative verb, or come at the end of the clause, the form of the
verb being the same in either case.
yn guilley rish t’ee ayns graih
yn guilley t’ee ayns graih rish - the boy she is in love with
yn inneen r’ee t’eh ayns graih
yn inneen t’eh ayns graih r’ee - the girl he is in love with
ny guillyn roo t’ee ayns graih
ny guillyn t’ee ayns graih roo - the boys she is in love with
Examples:
ny greeshyn orroo hie eh seose - his ascent [the stairs] by which he went up (2
Chronicles 9:4)
thieyn ayndoo nagh vel dooinney erbee cummal - in houses which no man inhabiteth
[lives in] (Job 15:28)
adsyn oc ta enney er - they that know him (Job 24:1)
nyn moir, r’ee ta mee er scarrey? - your mother…whom I have put away [from whom
I have separated] (Isaiah 50:1)
moddee yollyssagh nagh vel dy bragh dy liooar oc - greedy dogs which can never
have enough (Isaiah 56:11)
ymmodee va drogh-spyrrydyn ayndoo - many that were possessed with devils [many
in whom there were devils] (Matthew 8:16)
With interrogatives there is a small number of prepositions (ec, ayns, gys) which can
appear in their basic, unconjugated forms before the relative verb:
cre gys nee’m dty hoylaghey - what thing shall I liken to thee (Lamentations 2:13)
quoi gys hem mayd? - to whom shall we go? (John 6:68)
Quoi ec ta fys? - Who knows?
Quoi ec ta seaghyn? quoi ec ta trimshey? quoi ec ta anvea? quoi ec ta beealeraght?
quoi ec ta lhottyn gyn oyr? quoi ec ta jirgid sooillyn? - Who hath woe? who hath
sorrow? who hath contentions? who hath babbling? who hath wounds without cause?
who hath redness of eyes? (Proverbs 23:29)
cre ayns ta dty niart vooar lhie - wherein thy great strength lieth (Judges 16:15)
Quoi ayns smoo ghoghe y ree taitnys dy hroggal gys ard-ooashley syrjey na mee
hene? - To whom would the king delight to do honour more than to myself? (Esther
6:6)
The normal relative construction, that is, with conjugated prepositions, may also be
used:
quoi echey ta niart erbee…? - who hath any strength…? (Psalm 18:31)
And this is compulsory if the preposition is at the end: one could say quoi ta niart
erbee echey? but never *quoi ta niart erbee ec? Manx prepositions, unlike English
ones (whatever the Latin-influenced teachings of pedants may say1), cannot appear on
their own without a directly following complement. The pronominal element of
prepositional pronouns (orroo etc.) fulfils this need, and since the prepositional
pronouns are by their nature inflected for number and gender, agreement is
necessitated between the antecedent and the preposition.
In older Manx, and still in Irish and Scottish Gaelic, the dependent is used in relative
clauses involving prepositions. Traces of this may be seen in the Traditionary Ballad:
Quoi yn chied er ec row rieau ee - Who was the first who ever had her (v. 2)
Mannanan Beg va mac y Leirr, / Shen yn chied er ec row rieau ee - Mannanan Beg
who was the son of Leirr, that is the first one who ever had her (v. 3)
Compare Scottish Gaelic:
thàinig na h-uile gin do’n fheadhainn aig an robh an dà bhall dhubh air an aodann -
all of those who had the two black patches on their face came (Popular Tales of the
West Highlands p. 350)
Parenthetic clauses
Sentences of the following type are wont to confuse, and even the native writers
sometimes display confusion:
the man who I know is coming
‘The man who is coming’ would be a straightforward relative: yn dooinney ta çheet.
And ‘I know that the man is coming’ would be a straightforward subordinate Ta fys
aym dy vel y dooinney çheet. But to say yn dooinney ta fys aym ta çheet seems to
violate the rule that one cannot say *Ta fys aym ta… On the other hand, *yn dooinney
ta fys aym dy vel çheet seems to fail because dy vel çheet has no subject. It is, in fact,
yn dooinney ta fys aym ta çheet which is correct. Ta fys aym is a parenthetic
(‘bracketed’) clause, inserted between the main clause and the relative clause:
I know
ta fys aym
V
yn dooinney.........ta çheet
the man..............who is coming
Examples:
Shen va yn dhonney [dooinney] ta mee er glashtyn va reil[l] yn seihll ro[i]sh adam -
That is the man I have heard ruled the world before Adam (Ned Beg 30)
1 I mean that although some look down on preposition-stranding in sentences such as ‘What are you
standing in? and prefer In what are you standing?, the former type are, and have for a very long time
been, natural in English, whereas *Cre t’ou dty hassoo ayns? really would be ungrammatical. Note that
the construction deemed more grammatical in English, is absolutely impossible in Manx. One can say
Cre ayn(s) t’ou dty hassoo? or Cre t’ou dty hassoo ayn? but not *Ayns cre t’ou dty hassoo?.
’Syn ynnyd shoh, (ta shiu gra vees treigit fegooish dooinney ny baagh - in this place,
which ye say shall be desolate without man and without beast (Jeremiah 33:10)
ny biljyn ta fys ayd nagh vel son beaghey - the trees which thou knowest that they be
not trees for meat [the trees which thou knowest are not…] (Deuteronomy 20:20)
quoi jeu ta shiu smooinaghtyn ta’n chooid share echey ’sy vea shoh? - which do you
think has the better of it in this Life? (FRC p. 24)
t’ad jannoo shen sheign fys vie ve oc hene ta mee-chairagh - they do what they must
know to be [is] unjust (SW p. 111)
There is some confusion in the following example:
Agh quoi ta shiuish gra, dy vel mee? - But whom say ye that I am? (Matthew 16:15)
Normally with quoi the (zero) copula would be used, e.g. Quoi oo? Quoi uss? so Quoi
mee? But the copula would be odd in a parenthetic construction, especially since she
does not seem to be much used in relatives, and the short form of the copula is only
used with adjectives and fixed expressions. Scottish Gaelic has no such
compunctions, the equivalent being cò tha sibhse ag ràdh as mi? (Mx. *quoi ta
shiuish gra s’mee?).
Because ta can be used for the copula in Manx, one would expect quoi ta shiuish gra
ta mee? and this is what Phillips has:
quei ta shuiss grá ta mi?
Proverb of the Month:
Cha nee yn wooa smoo eieys smoo vlieaunys - It is not the cow that cries the most
that milks the most.