Bun as Bree 3
© Christopher Lewin 2011
Christopher Lewin
No. 3 - June 2011
A series of short articles on Manx Gaelic grammar, idiom, vocabulary
and pronunciation.
Waiting
Fuirraghtyn rish is probably what you learned as the Manx equivalent of ‘wait for’.
However, there are several different words and expressions meaning ‘wait’ in Manx, with
subtly different histories and meanings. We will explore them here.
The two standard ways of saying ‘wait for someone / something’ in the Manx Bible are the
verbs farkiagh (stem farkee or fark) and fieau (only as a verbal noun1) with the prepositions
er or son. Er is more common; son is possibly due to English influence2. Rish never occurs
with these two verbs (in contrast to Scottish Gaelic, where feitheamh ri is common alongside
air and airson).
Fieau is only used meaing to wait for someone or something. Farkiagh is mostly used with
this meaning, sometimes meaning more generally ‘wait, stay, tarry’. This is the usual sense
of fuirraghtyn: it is used dozens of times in the Bible, but only twice (with son) can it be
construed as meaning ‘waiting for someone’, in Exodus 24:14 and 1 Corinthians 11:33.
Fuirraghtyn rish never appears in the Bible.
These words thus overlap in sense, but in summary we can say of Classical Manx that fieau
er (/son) and farkiagh er (/son) are the normal ways of expressing ‘wait for’. Fuirraghtyn
son is a possible occasional alternative. Farkiagh and fuirraghtyn can mean ‘stay’ or ‘tarry’
in a place, whether you are waiting for something in particular or not.
1 Like ceau from caith-caitheamh, there seems to be no trace of the separate stem feith of feitheamh: the -eamh
of the verb-noun ending has fused with the stem to make a monosyllable. In the case of ceau, this new
monosyllabic fused form has replaced the stem, e.g. cha geau ‘will not throw’ (Joel 2:10) representing cha
gcaitheamh for historic cha gcaith, contemporary ScG. cha chaith. Contrast shass-shassoo (seas-seasamh)
where stem and ending remain distinct because of the consonant. Unlike ceau, where inflected tenses are amply
attested (past cheau, future ceauee, cha geau, dy geau-ym), fieau seems only to be attested as a verbal noun so
far as I know—no *dieau, cha vieau etc., so in the absense of evidence to the contrary it is probably best to
treat it as defective and inflect it periphrastically with jannoo (ren mee fieau etc.).
2 Especially since the earlier translation in Phillips prayer book has several instances of farkiagh er where the
later Bible has farkiagh son, e.g. Psalm 71:9, Romans 8:23, 1 Corinthians 1:7, though erson appears even in
Phillips in Luke 23:51.
1
Bun as Bree 3
© Christopher Lewin 2011
Here are a few examples of these three verbs:
1.	Fieau (Ir, ScG. feitheamh):
Choud as v’ad fieau er y dooinney poosee, huitt ad ooilley er saveenagh as cadley - While
the bridegroom tarried [while they were waiting for the bridegroom], they all slumbered and
slept (Matthew 25:5)
Ayndoo shoh va nyn lhie ymmodee dy leih dourinagh, doail, baccee, shirgeydee, as v’ad
fieau er gleashaght yn ushtey - In these lay a great multitude of impotent folk, of blind, halt,
withered, waiting for the moving of the water (John 5:3)
As haink eh gy-kione, tra va Yeesey er jeet back, dy ghow yn pobble lane boggey jeh: son
v’ad ooilley fieau er - And it came to pass, that, when Jesus was returned, the people gladly
received him: for they were all waiting for him (Luke 8:40)
As va’n pobble fieau son Zacharias, as yindys orroo dy row eh cumrail choud ayns y
chiamble - The people waited for Zacharias, and marvelled that he tarried so long in the
temple (Luke 1:21)
ny frassyn er y faiyr, nagh vel lurg aigney dooinney, ny fieau son mec deiney - the showers
upon the grass, that tarrieth not for man, nor waiteth for the sons of men (Micah 5:7)
Fieau er can also mean ‘wait on’ in the sense of ‘attend to, serve’:
Bee ee er ny choyrt lh’ee gys y ree ayns garmad dy obbyr snaidey: hig ny moidynyn ta fieau
urree ayns dty enish - She shall be brought unto the King in raiment of needle-work: the
virgins that be her fellows [wait on her] shall bear her company, and shall be brought unto
thee (Psalms 45:15)
A useful phrase with fieau is fieau er caa, ‘wait for an opportunity’:
va jees jeh shamyrderyn y ree…fieau er caa dy stroie ree Ahasuerus - two of the king’s
chamberlains…sought to lay hands on [were waiting for an opportunity to destroy] the king
Ahasuerus (Esther 2:21)
As v’eh fieau er caa dy vrah eh - And he sought how he might conveniently betray him [he
was waiting for an opportunity to betray him] (Mark 14:11)
2.	Farkiagh(t) (Ir. faircsin):
Son ta’n ashlish foast son traa ry-heet, agh ec y jerrey nee eh loayrt, as cha nee ayns fardail:
ga dy vel eh lhiggey shaghey, fark er, son hig eh son shickyrys, cha jean eh cumrail - For
the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak, and not lie: though it
tarry, wait for it; because it will surely come, it will not tarry (Habakkuk 2:3)
Cre’n-fa ta shin nyn soie ayns shoh farkiagh er y baase? - Why sit we here until we die
[waiting for death]? (2 Kings 7:3)
va troailtee Sheba farkiaght orroo - the companies of Sheba waited for them (Job 6:19)
2
Bun as Bree 3
© Christopher Lewin 2011
Fark-jee er-y-fa shen, vraaraghyn, derrey cheet y Chiarn. Cur-my-ner, ta’n eirinnagh
farkiagh son mess berchagh y thallooin, as t’eh farkiagh foddey er y hon - Be patient
therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord. Behold, the husbandman waiteth for the
precious fruit of the earth, and hath long patience for it [waits a long time for it] (James 5:7)
Myr shoh jimmee yn phadeyr roish, as ren eh farkiagh son y ree er y raad, as ren eh eh-hene
gyn-yss da liorish coodagh e eddin - So the prophet departed, and waited for the king by the
way, and disguised himself with ashes upon his face (1 Kings 20:38)
Without a preposition:
As lurg dhyt farkiagh three laa, eisht hed oo sheese dy tappee, as hig oo gys yn ynnyd raad
v’ou follit roïe tra va’n chooish ayns laue, as nee oo fuirriaght liorish y chlagh Ezel - And
when thou hast stayed three days, then thou shalt go down quickly, and come to the place
where thou didst hide thyself when the business was in hand, and shalt remain by the stone
Ezel (1 Samuel 20:19)
jean-jee farkiagh, shass-jee raad ta shiu, as cur-jee my-ner saualtys y Chiarn mêriu - set
yourselves, stand ye still, and see the salvation of the Lord with you (2 Chronicles 20:17)
Farkiagh appears in the idiom lhie farkiagh ‘lying in wait’, which is synonymous, and may
be combined, with lhie cooyl-chlea. It may be followed by er or son:
dy vel my vac er ghreinnaghey my harvaant m’oï, dy lhie farkiagh er my vioys - that my
son hath stirred up my servant against me, to lie in wait [on my life] (1 Samuel 22:8)
t’adsyn ta lhie farkiaght son m’annym, coyrt nyn goyrle dy cheilley - they that lay wait for
my soul take their counsel together (Psalm 71:9)
lhie ad farkiagh dy feagh er e hon fud-ny-hoie ec giat yn ard-valley - [they] laid wait for
him all night in the gate of the city, and were quiet all the night (Judges 16:2)
lhie eh farkiagh ayns y vagher - [he]laid wait in the field (Judges 9:43)
As mannagh vel dooinney lhie farkiagh cooyl-chlea dy varroo fer elley, agh dy nee Jee t’er
leeideil eh ny raad; neem’s eisht boayl y phointeil dhyt dasyn dy roie er-chea huggey - And
if a man lie not in wait, but God deliver him into his hand; then I will appoint thee a place
whither he shall flee (Exodus 21:13)
3.	Fuirr(i)aght(yn). This verb very frequently occurs, without a preposition, in a sense
similar to farkiagh above. It means ‘wait, stay, abide, remain, tarry’, regardless of whether
one is waiting FOR something in particular. Its connotations are fairly concrete, of staying in
a geographical location (cf. ScG. fuireach which often means ‘live, dwell’—the Manx would
seem to imply less permanence / duration than the Scottish). The predominantly concrete
connotation of fuirraghtyn contrasts with the more abstract sense of tannaghtyn, ‘remain or
continue in a state or action’.
3
Bun as Bree 3
© Christopher Lewin 2011
Raad erbee dy jed shiu stiagh ayns thie, fuirree-jee ayn derrey aagys shiu yn ynnyd shen - In
what place soever ye enter into an house, there abide till ye depart from that place (Mark
6:10)
As deïe Jonathan lurg y yuilley, Jean siyr, dy tappee, ny fuirree - And Jonathan cried after
the lad, Make speed, haste, stay not (1 Samuel 20:38)
Trog ort, gow yn lhiannoo as e voir, cosne royd gys Egypt, as fuirree ayns shen derrey ver-
yms fys hood - Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and be
[stay] thou there until I bring thee word (Matthew 2:13)
Dooyrt Yeesey rish, My she m’aigney’s eh eshyn dy uirriaght derrey hig-ym, cre ta shen
dhyt’s? Eiyr uss orrym’s - Jesus saith unto him, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that
to thee? follow thou me (John 21:22)
Cur-my-ner, yinnin eisht cosney roym foddey jeh: as fuirraght ayns yn aasagh - Lo, then
would I get me away far off: and remain in the wilderness (Psalms 55:7)
There are a couple of examples in the Bible of fuirraghtyn with a preposition, but it is not
rish:
Shen-y-fa, my vraaraghyn, tra ta shiu cheet cooidjagh dy ee, fuirree-jee yn derrey yeh son y
jeh elley - Wherefore, my brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one for another (1
Corinthians 11:33)
Fuirree-jee ayns shoh er nyn son, derrey hig mayd hiu reesht - Tarry ye here for us, until
we come again unto you (Exodus 24:14)
An idiom involving either fuirraghtyn or farkiagh is fark ort! / fuirree ort! equivalent to
English ‘hold on! hang on! wait a moment! wait there!’. It is a prepositional reflexive verb,
in which the prepositional part agrees with the subject, like cur lhiat, troggal ort, cosney
royd etc. but is only found in the imperative.
Eisht dooyrt ee, Fark ort, my inneen, derrey hee mayd kys hed y chooish: son cha bee fea er
y dooinney derrey vees eh er y laa shoh er chooilleeney e yialdyn - Then said she, Sit still,
my daughter, until thou know how the matter will fall: for the man will not be in rest, until
he have finished the thing this day (Ruth 3:18)
Caïd nagh bee jerrey er nyn ghoan? fuirree-jee erriu, as ny lurg shen nee mayd loayrt -
How long will it be ere ye make an end of words? mark, and afterwards we will speak (Job
18:2)
fuirree ort - wait! (Thomas Christian, Handbook of Late Spoken Manx p. 180)
Kelly in his Grammar also gives Agh fuirree ort as an conjunction ‘yet, but still’,
presumably referring to the idea of saying ‘hold on, wait a moment’ to signal a change of
thought or topic in a conversation.
4
Bun as Bree 3
© Christopher Lewin 2011
Late Spoken Manx:
In the recordings of Late Spoken Manx, the patterns of usage of the three verbs are basically
the same as in the Bible. In Broderick’s Handbook of Late Spoken Manx dictionary, only
fieau (with preposition er, son, or, perhaps abnormally, da) is used for ‘wait for’: farkiagh
has only one example, fuirraghtyn several, and they have a similar usage to what is found the
Bible. They do not appear with prepositions (although the reflexive idiom fuirree ort is
recorded, see above).
All the following examples are from the Handbook:
1.	fieau
ta mee fieau ort - I am waiting for you (JW)
ta mee fieau son echey - I’m waiting for him (JW)
neeym’s fieau dhyt’s - I will wait for you (HK)
2.	farkiagh
my nee oo fark aynshoh marym’s - if you stay here with me (NM)
3.	fuirraghtyn
cha ren eh fuirraght feer foddey ayn - he didn’t stay very long there (JK)
t’ad goll dy fuirraght ayns Rhymsaa - they’re going to stay in Ramsey (NM)
cha row ad fuirraght un vinnid - they didn’t wait one minute (JK)
foddee dy bee ad fuirraghtyn gaa ny tree laghyn - perhaps they will stay two or three days
(HB)
fuirree, bwa, yiowym’s oo foast - wait, boy, I’ll get you yet (TT)
ny fuirree aynshoh - don’t wait / stay here (TC)
Fuirraghtyn rish
Fuirraghtyn rish seems to be conspicuous by its absence from the Bible and the corpus of
native speech. It is attested, though, in Early and archaic Manx:
In Phillips prayer book:
Furrigi anayn rish anayn elle (Fuirree-jee unnane rish unnane elley) - tarry one for another
(Thursday before Easter, 1 Corinthians 11:33)
In Pargys Caillit:
ayns shen va Chaos myr ree freayll e chooyrt,
as e choonceil ghoo trooid-[y]-cheilley loayrt;
cha row fockle fuirragh’ rish fockle elley,
as ayns y dooid cha row ad fakin shilley
-	there Chaos as a king kept his court, / and spoke his black counsel confusedly; / no
word waited for another word, / and in the darkness they did not see a sight (Pargys Caillit,
Thomson ed., ll. 2640-3, my literal translation)
5
Bun as Bree 3
© Christopher Lewin 2011
Agh cur ansoor gys shen ny hirr mee ort;
cha veeu lhiam fuirraght’ arragh rhyt dy loayrt.
-	But give an answer to that which I asked you; / I deign not to wait anymore for you
to speak (ibid. ll. 2694-5)
Foast cha duirree’n sp’ryd rish yn giat y ghoaill
agh, myr v’eh maarliagh, harrish lheim eh’n voall’;
-	Still the spirit did not wait [for] to take the gate / but, as he was a thief, he jumped
over the wall (ibid. ll. 3226-7)
On this evidence, it would appear that fuirraghtyn rish is an archaic form; however, I have
found one example of it in a Late Manx text, in the story Saggyrt as ny Shellanyn written
down by Edward Faragher:
agh cha jeanagh eh furriagh rish piagh erbee gys hooar eh gys y hie dy ghoaill ny shellanyn
as y chroosyn3 - He didn’t wait for anybody till he got to his house to take the bees out of his
trousers (‘Manx Stories and Reminiscences of Ned Beg Hom Ruy’, George Broderick ed., p.
160)
This may suggest that fuirraghtyn rish was still in natural use in the Late Manx of the
nineteenth century, but since this is apparently a traditional tale, the use of furriagh rish may
well be an archaism passed down in the oral transmission of the story.
How then do we explain the preponderance of fuirraghtyn rish in revived Manx and the
disappearance of fieau and farkiagh?
Goodwin’s First Lessons gives fuirraght in its vocabulary (§28), but gives no indication of
how to say ‘wait for’. As far as I can see there is only one translation exercise with this verb,
ny jean fuirraght ec y dorrys; jeigh yn dorrys, where fuirraghtyn is used appropriately in its
usual Classical and Late Manx sense. Fieau and farkiaght are not mentioned anywhere in the
book. Thus anyone in the last one hundred and ten years who learnt Manx using this book,
excellent though it generally is, would not have learnt systematically how to say ‘wait for’,
and any exposure to fieau and farkiaght would probably be accidental, by encountering them
in the Bible, or possibly from native speakers.
J. J. Kneen has the following entry for ‘wait’ in his English-Manx Dictionary (first published
in 1938):
wait, fuirree (furree) 13. Wait for me, fuirree rhym.
Again farkiagh and fieau do not get a look-in (although fieauder is given in the next entry
for ‘waiter’), and the example gives rish definitively as the preposition that goes with the
verb, without any alternatives. Probably Kneen was influenced by the other languages,
which sometimes use ri (or le in Irish, where rish and lesh have fallen together), and by the
use of fuirraghtyn rish in the archaic texts. It is clear that Kneen believed in going back to
earlier, in his view purer forms of the language; compare how he tries to shoehorn Manx
nouns into Irish declensions in his grammar.
3 agh cha jinnagh eh fuirragh rish peiagh erbee gys hooar eh gys e hie dy ghoaill ny shellanyn ass e hroosyn
6
Bun as Bree 3
© Christopher Lewin 2011
By the time of Gell’s Conversational Manx in 1954 fuirraghtyn rish had apparently become
orthodoxy, and in Lesson 7 we find the following:
9. Dy jarroo ta, jean oo fuirraght rhym?
9. Indeed yes, will you wait for me?
And the notes state authoritatively:
7. Note the preposition ‘da’ with verb ‘insh’.
9. Similarly, ‘rish’ with verb ‘fuirraght’.
From these beginnings, this distortion of the language in favour of an obscure archaism,
along with the forgetting of the expected usual forms, appears to have spread far and wide.
Fargher’s dictionary does give fieau and farkiaght, but they would appear to little known and
little used nonetheless.
What are we to say to all this? It seems fieau er and farkiagh er ‘should’ be the standard
expressions for ‘wait for’ taught to learners; fuirraghtyn rish is strictly speaking correct, but
archaic: we don’t go around using other Phillips forms such as gy vel, gy mie, ta mee credjue
(for credjal) etc., so why should we say fuirraghtyn rish? Even if the evidence from Ned Beg
is taken into account, and the possibility admitted that fuirraghtyn rish remained current in
speech but evaded attestation, it is probably safe to say that fuirraghtyn rish should not by
rights be the default form.
In actuality fuirraghtyn rish has become so prevalent that it would probably be undesirable
and counterproductive to try to get rid of it; it is certainly not outright ‘wrong’, and I am
aware that this sort of thing is open to the charge of nitpicking. There is some merit in the
argument that languages change and this should just be accepted; sometimes errors and
misunderstandings gain the upper hand and become the received norm, even in languages in
a natural state. However, it certainly cannot be a bad thing for those who are interested to
know the facts, and have the free choice to use the other forms if they wish. It would also be
a great shame for farkiagh and fieau to fade away and be forgotten, since they are not
strange, obscure, old-fashioned forms from the Bible; they were used by the likes of Ned
Maddrell!
Other words related to the sense of ‘waiting’
As noted above, while fuirraghtyn means ‘wait, stay, remain’ in a mostly concrete sense,
tannaghtyn (in Phillips fannaghtyn) tends to be more abstract, and to imply greater duration:
Ayns e wannal ta niart tannaghtyn - In his neck remaineth strength (Job 41:22)
dy vod gloyr tannaghtyn ayns y cheer ain - that glory may dwell in our land (Psalm 85:9)
dy vod mad tannaghtyn dy yanoo shen gys jerrey nyn seihll - that…we may continue to do
so unto our lives end (Plain and Short Directions and Prayers, p. 18)
Nee yn sluight echey tannaghtyn son dy bragh - His seed shall continue for ever (Psalm
89:35)
7
Bun as Bree 3
© Christopher Lewin 2011
Farraghtyn is ‘last, endure’:
Son cha vel e chorree farraghtyn agh meekey sooilley, as ayns y foayr echey ta bea: foddee
trimshey farraghtyn son oie, agh ta boggey cheet ’sy voghrey - For his wrath endureth but
the twinkling of an eye, and in his pleasure is life: heaviness may endure for a night, but joy
cometh in the morning (Psalm 30:5)
Cumrail as an intransitive verb means ‘wait, tarry, linger, dawdle, procrastinate’; in the latter
senses it is synonymous with lhiggey shaghey:
Son ta’n ashlish foast son traa ry-heet, agh ec y jerrey nee eh loayrt, as cha nee ayns fardail:
ga dy vel eh lhiggey shaghey, fark er, son hig eh son shickyrys, cha jean eh cumrail - For
the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak, and not lie: though it
tarry, wait for it; because it will surely come, it will not tarry (Habakkuk 2:3)
As va’n pobble fieau son Zacharias, as yindys orroo dy row eh cumrail choud ayns y
chiamble - And the people waited for Zacharias, and marvelled that he tarried so long in the
temple (Luke 1:21)
As choud as v’eh cumrail, haare ny ainlyn greme er e laue, as er laue e ven, as e ghaa inneen
- And while he lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand, and upon the hand of his wife, and
upon the hand of his two daughters (Genesis 19:16)
Soie-jee seose yn mergey lesh Zion: reue-jee, ny jean-jee cumrail - Set up the standard
toward Zion: retire [go forth], stay not (Jeremiah 4:6)
As a transitive verb, cumrail means ‘hold up, delay, hinder’:
Cre’n-oyr ta’n fainagh echey fuirriaght choud? cre ta cumrail queeylyn e ainagh? - Why is
his chariot so long in coming? why tarry the wheels of his chariots? (Judges 5:28)
Ny jean-jee m’y chumrail, fakin dy vel y Chiarn er choyrt speedeil mie da my chooish -
Hinder me not, seeing the Lord hath prospered my way (Genesis 24:56)
Jerkal rish ‘expect’:
As ghow eh tastey jeu, jerkal rish red ennagh y gheddyn voue - And he gave heed unto
them, expecting to receive something of them (Acts 3:5)
Jeeaghyn son ‘look (out) for’:
ta shin jeeaghyn son livrey-ys, agh cha vel eh cheet - we look for judgment [deliverance],
but there is none (Isaiah 59:11)
The following diagram illustrates the various words and idoms, and how their senses
overlap:
8
Bun as Bree 3
© Christopher Lewin 2011
Waiting, staying, continuing, enduring, expecting
- words and expressions in Manx
Cha row dy niart oc
This was raised at the recent Forum ny Gaelgey. The following idiom appears twice in the
Bible:
cha row fort ayndoo dy yannoo shickyr yn chroan; cha row dy niart ayndoo dy skeayley yn
shiaull - they could not well strengthen their mast, they could not spread the sail (Isaiah
33:23)
Cuir-jee magh yn lieen er y cheu-yesh jeh’n lhong, as bee eh eu. Eisht chuir ad: as nish cha
row dy niart oc yn lieen y ghoaill stiagh va lhied y thummyd eeast ayn - And he said unto
them, Cast the net on the right side of the ship, and ye shall find. They cast therefore, and
now they were not able to draw it for the multitude of fishes (John 21:6)
This is probably dy as in jeh ‘of’, so ‘they did not have of strength to take in the net > they
did not have enough strength…’. This idiom is common in Gaelic, where it can be used with
any noun, but it appears to have been fossilized in Manx with niart. Compare Scottish
Gaelic:
chan eil de dh’airgead anns an t-saoghal a phàigheadh gus na h-Eileanan a dhìon bhon
Chuain - there is not enough money in the world to pay for protecting the Islands from the
Ocean (The Scotsman, 31 July 2005)
Proverb of the month:
Eaisht lesh daa chleaysh eisht jean briwnys. - Listen with two ears then make judgement.
9