Bun as Bree 3
© Christopher Lewin 2011
Christopher Lewin
No. 4 - July 2011
A series of short articles on Manx Gaelic grammar, idiom, vocabulary
and pronunciation.
I thought I would concentrate this time on an assortment of various idioms and
phrases that crop up in the old texts, especially ones that might be useful in
conversation or writing today. For reasons of space I have not given many examples
in full, just references. For abbreviations, see end.
Miscellaneous expressions
hoshiaght - firstly
hoshiaght ooilley - first of all (1 Cor. 15:3, 1 Tim. 2:1)
’sy nah ynnyd - secondly, next
’sy trass ynnyd - thirdly
er-jerrey - lastly, finally
er-jerrey ooilley - last of all (Matt. 22:27, 1 Cor. 4:9)
The above phrases are notably used to order arguments and sections in Coyrle Sodjeh,
Yn Fer-raauee Creestee, Bishop Wilson’s sermons etc. Note the distinction between
er-jerrey ‘last (in a sequence)’ and fey-yerrey ‘at last, finally, eventually’; they are not
interchangeable.
ayns focklyn giarrey - in short, in brief, in summary (FRC p. 6, 34)
ayns beggan focklyn - in short, briefly etc. (FRC p. 43)
gyn arragh y ghra - in short (lit. without saying anymore) (SyC p. 52)
gyn eie er - besides, not to mention (Judges 20:15)
gow lesh! - go on! (in speaking), say on! (Gen. 24:33, 1 Sam. 15:16)
tar royd! - come on! (Matt. 14:29, Gen. 19:32)
fuirree ort! fark ort!1 - wait! hang on! hold on! (Job 18:2, Ruth 3:18)
ass dty aash - adv. quietly, softly (PSD p. 20, Gen. 33:14); also interj. hush! quiet!
(Kelly grammar p. 74)
cha n’aggle dou - tush! no fear! (Ps. 10:6, 94:7; MBM p. 168)
1 see Bun as Bree 3
1
Bun as Bree 3
© Christopher Lewin 2011
marish shen - besides / apart from that, moreover (1 Kings 10:13, 1 Chron. 22:15)
er shen - with that (as ‘with that he left’), afterwards, then, so (Ex. 34:32, John 6:13)
Note the difference between English ‘with that’ and Manx marish shen. Since there
are a number of words in Manx corresponding to English ‘with’ (marish, lesh, rish),
marish has a more specific and unambiguous meaning of accompaniment in Manx, so
‘along with that’ > ‘besides that, apart from that’. Cf. the ambiguity of English ‘fight
with’ and the clarity of Manx caggey marish v. caggey rish. The English ‘with that’,
which basically means ‘after that, then’, is er shen in Manx. Lesh shen does not seem
to have any special idiomatic meaning.
s’feer shen, s’feer eh - true, that’s true, it’s true (Dan. 3:24, SW p. 8)
dy jarroo firrinagh - (Rom. 3:31, SW p. 231)
dy firrinagh-focklagh - truly (John 8:34, SW p. 229)
shen myr t’eh - that’s how it is, it is so (2 Sam. 2:23, Job 5:27)
cha nee shen myr t’eh - no, not so, that’s not how it is (1 Sam. 1:15, 1 Kings 3:22)
lioar - yes, indeed (e.g. lioar ta - indeed yes) (Mal. 2:2, Is. 40:24)
son shoh as ooilley - nevertheless (2 Sam. 24:4, 1 Cor. 14:21)
ayns ayrn ennagh - in some measure, to some extent (FRC p. 32)
cha vel feme rish - there’s no need for it (Gen. 33:15)
myr vees feme rish - as needed (1 Sam. 10:7)
son mac-soyley - in comparison, as a comparison, for instance (SW p. 7, 119)
ayns (co-)soylagh(ey) rish - in comparison with (Haggai 2:3, SW p. 203)
ta my haie fys aym - I know full well (lit. I have my fill of knowledge) (SW p. 12,
36)
kys dhyt? (1 Cor. 7:16, 2 Sam. 1:5) / kevys dhyt? (Creg.) - How do you know?
cha s’aym - I don’t know (cha s’aym - Luke 22:60, cha s’ayd - John 3:8, cha s’ain -
Gen. 43:22, cha s’eu - Mark 10:2) (really cha ’s aym = cha [vel fy]s aym)
quoi ec ta fys? - who knows? (Ecclesiastes 6:12, Esther 4:14)
ec Jee ta fys - God knows (2 Cor. 11:11, SW p. 66)
er fys da - known to (Ex. 21:36) (T’eh er fys dou - It is known to me, I’m aware of it)
gyn-yss da - unbeknown to, without the knowledge of, hidden from (Num. 15:24)
choud’s s’bio mee - as long as I live (1 Cor. 8:13, SW p. 76)
choud’s vee’m bio - as long as I live (1 Sam. 28:2, SW p. 147)
Yiow kied - ‘You’ll get lave’
From the Vocabulary of the Anglo-Manx dialect, under ‘lave’:
LAVE, ‘leave’. The expression ‘You’ll get lave’ is in very common use in the Isle of Man and seems to be
peculiar to it. It is a literal translation of the Manx ‘Yiow kied’ (thou wilt get leave), and has many shades of
meaning according to the way in which it is applied. It is very often equivalent to the English expression ‘Say what
you will’.
T. E. Brown says : ‘At the beginning of an argument it is very cheerful.-“Oh ! you’ll get lave !” That means, “I
will give you leave to say what you like!” But as you go on arguing perhaps you are not holding your own, and
you say in a somewhat gloomy tone, “Aw, well; you’ll get lave; get lave enough; you’ll get lave plenty.” Sir James
Gell said that a Manxman always made use of it when he was beaten in an argument but would not give in. In such
a case it meant, ‘I don’t agree with you’.
2
Bun as Bree 3
© Christopher Lewin 2011
All I gorr urrov him was, ‘You’ll get lave’. Well thas the way it is, and thou’ll get lave. The lek is in, and you’ll get
lave, i. e. there are such, say what you will. You may talk till your lil-tongue is out, and you’ll get lave.
I’m goin, and you’ll get lave. I’ve gorrit here, aw, you’ll get lave (B.).
The oul’ Manx ones say, ‘Aw, yiow kied, yiow kied, it’s their own way they’ll have’.
I imagine that yiow kied (properly yiow oo kied cf. t’ou < *ta oo) could be a very
useful expression today, for ‘have it your own way’, ‘say what you like’, or certain
uses of the ubiquitous contemporary colloquial English expression of apathy
‘whatever’. A very useful phrase if you are having an argument and want to give in
without admitting you are wrong.
I would be grateful if anyone could shed light on you’ll get lave. The Vocabulary
suggests that the phrase was ‘in very common use’; does anyone still use it? Does
anyone remember older people using it?
Cha jig lhiat jannoo shen!
The usual meaning of çheet lesh is ‘succeed, manage to do something; prosper’, as in
the following examples:
As va ben va roie foalley er ve eck rish daa vlein jeig, v’er vaarail ooilley e cooid-
seihlt er fir-lhee, as cha daink eh lesh veg jeu ee y lheihys - And a woman having an
issue of blood twelve years, which had spent all her living upon physicians, neither
could be healed of any [and none of them succeeded in healing her] (Luke 8:43)
As va’n Chiarn mârish, as cre-erbee ghow eh ayns laue haink eh lesh - And the Lord
was with him; and he prospered whithersoever he went forth [and in whatever he
undertook he succeeded / prospered] (2 Kings 18:7)
But in the negative it can also have another meaning, of being unable to something in
the sense of it being improper or outrageous, or not allowed:
eisht jir eshyn, Bee dty host; son cha jig lhien gimraa er ennym y Chiarn - Then shall
he say, Hold thy tongue: for we may not mazke mention of the name of the Lord
(Amos 6:10)
As dooyrt Moses, Cha jig lhien dy yannoo myr shen - And Moses said, It is not meet
so to do (Exodus 8:26)
Agh cha jig lhien dy choyrt daue mraane jeh ny inneenyn ainyn: son va cloan Israel
er chiangley ad-hene fo mollaght, gra, Cursit vees eshyn ver ben da Benjamin -
Howbeit we may not give them wives of our daughters: for the children of Israel have
sworn, saying, Cursed be he that giveth a wife to Benjamin (Judges 21:18)
son yn order ta scruit ayns ennym y ree, as sealit lesh fainey yn ree, cha jig lesh
dooinney erbee goll n’oi - for the writing which is written in the king’s name, and
sealed with the king’s ring, may no man reverse (Esther 8:8)
3
Bun as Bree 3
© Christopher Lewin 2011
If we were to say Cha jig lhiat jannoo shen! it would mean ‘You can’t do that!’, but
with a tone of disapproval or outrage; we know that whatever it is can physically be
done, but are expressing that it is forbidden, unthinkable or undesirable.
‘To Meet’
There are various expressions for ‘meet’ in Manx.
çheet quail - meet, come to meet
goll quail - meet, go to meet
Although quail is mostly associated with the verbs çheet and goll, it is a preposition
meaning ‘towards, to meet’ which can be used with any verb:
Hug cummaltee cheer Teman lhieu ushtey huggeysyn va paagh, roie ad lesh nyn arran
ny whail-syn ren chea - The inhabitants of the land of Tema brought water to him that
was thirsty, they prevented with their bread him that fled [they ran with their bread to
meet him who fled] (Isaiah 21:14)
Dy bee mayd cooidjagh troggit seose, / Quail Yeesey ayns ny bodjallyn! - that we
will be lifted up together, to meet Jesus in the clouds! (my translation - 1799 hymn
24).
Quail includes an elided preposition i ‘in’ (=ayns) and so conjugates like lurg, noi,
mastey etc. The statement in First Lessons 164 that it ‘lacks a simple preposition’2 is
simply false, and contradicted by no fewer than thirty instances of quail + noun in the
Bible. (The same goes for my yei, dty yei etc., which allegedly has ‘no simple
prepositional form’ according to First Lessons 160 — in fact the simple form jeiy
[=jei] occurs in SW p. 73)
Hie mee quail yn dooinney, haink eh my whail, hie shin dty whail, haink ad ny whail,
roie mee ny quail, ren oo siyr nyn guail, etc.
There is also meeiteil rish and cur meeiteil da:
Veeit Philip rish Nathanael - Philip findeth [met] Nathanael (John 1:45)
ver y cooilleeneyder-folley yn dunver dy baase, tra t’eh meeiteil rish - the revenger of
blood shall slay the murderer, when he meeteth him (Num. 35:21)
As hug y Chiarn meeiteil da Balaam - And the Lord met Balaam (Num. 23:16)
As hie ree Ahaz gys Damascus dy choyrt meeiteil da Tiglath-pileser ree Assyria -
And king Ahaz went to Damascus to meet Tiglathpileser king of Assyria (2 Kings
16:10)
2 By ‘simple preposition’ First Lessons here (§164) means the form without a pronoun, such as cour as
opposed to my chour etc; it is asserted that the simple, i.e. non-pronominal forms jei and quail do not
exist, which is false. In §154 the term ‘simple prepositions’ is used to mean those prepositions
consisting of a single part such as ec, er, fo etc. and which form their pronouns with endings -m, -t/-d
etc. rather than using possessives like my yei, dty whail etc.
4
Bun as Bree 3
© Christopher Lewin 2011
Meeiteil is also frequently found without rish:
Myr dooinney ta chea veih lion, as meeiteil muc-awin - As if a man did flee [flees]
from a lion, and a bear met him [and meets a bear] (Amos 5:19)
Then there is cur qualtys / quaaltagh da:
Ta myghin as firrinys er choyrt qualtys d’y cheilley - Mercy and truth are met
together (Ps. 85:10)
Ver-ym quaaltagh daue myr y vuc-awin ta er choayl e quallianyn - I will meet them
as a bear that is bereaved of her whelps (Hos. 13:8)
Lhig da muc-awin t’er choayl e quallianyn ve quaaltagh dooinney, roish ommydan
ayns farg - Let a bear robbed of her whelps meet a man, rather than a fool in his folly.
(Prov. 17:12)
In the latter example, and possibly the one before as well, the Manx translator seems
to be playing on the specific cultural sense of qualtagh as the ‘first foot’, the first
person or creature one meets going out and who might bring bad luck. The translator
presents this verse as ‘It’s better to have a bear that’s lost her cubs as your quaaltagh /
‘first foot’ than a fool in his anger’, keeping the basic sense of the Hebrew proverb
but adding a Manx cultural (and superstitious) resonance.
A. W. Moore in Folklore of the Isle of Man gives us the following information on this
custom:
The “first foot,” called the qualtagh in Manx, is defined as follows by Kelly in his Dictionary:
“the first person or creature one meets going from home. This person is of great consequence
to the superstitious, particularly to women the first time they go out after lying-in.” The
qualtagh (he or she) may also be the first person who enters a house on New Year’s morning.
The words quail (preposition) and quaiyl (noun meaning ‘court (of law)’), and their
derivatives qua(a)ltys and qua(a)ltagh, all have the same origin in the Irish word
cómhdháil which Dinneen gives as ‘meeting, convention, presence, interview; act of
accompanying; opposition’, as in Cómhdháil Ceilteach ‘Celtic Congress’. This in turn
is a combination of the prefix cómh- (Mx. co-) with dáil, which is now used for the
name of the lower house of the Irish parliament.
There is also çheet raad ‘meet, encounter, come across’, where raad works the same
way as quail (my raad, dty raad, ny raad, nyn raad).
As cha leah’s daag eh eh, haink lion ny raad, as varr eh eh - And as soon as he was
departed from him, a lion found him, and slew him (1 Kings 20:36)
Shen-y-fa ren eh resooney ayns y synagogue rish ny Hewnyn, as rish ny deiney
crauee, as ayns thie ny quaallagh gagh laa roosyn va cheet ny raad - Therefore
disputed he in the synagogue with the Jews, and with the devout persons, and in the
market [court-house] daily with them that met with him (Acts 17:17)
5
Bun as Bree 3
© Christopher Lewin 2011
Note that the most natural order in modern English might be the opposite of the
Manx; you might say in Manx haink shenn charrey my raad jea, lit. ‘an old friend
came in my way yesterday’, where in English it would be ‘I met / came across an old
friend yesterday’.
‘Leave me alone’:
Lhig lhiam! (Job 7:16)
Lhig fea dou! (Job 10:20, 7:19)	Leave me alone!
Faag void mee! (Mark 1:24, John 12:7) Let me be!
Ny cur eie orrym! (Acts 5:38)
Lhiggey lesh is a phrasal verb meaning ‘leave alone’ but also ‘spare (someone’s life)’
(as in Jer. 45:5 bee dty vioys lhiggit lhiat), for which it has the synonyms sparail
(from English, e.g. Gen. 18:26 nee’m yn slane ynnyd y sparail er y graih ocsyn ‘I will
spare all the place for their sakes’) and shaghney (e.g. Eshyn nagh ren e Vac hene y
haghney ‘He that spared not his own Son’), though there is an ambiguity with
shaghney as it can also (and more often) mean ‘avoid’ and ‘escape’.
In faagail void the preposition veih agrees with the subject, as with cur lhiat, troggal
ort etc. We will look at these verbs more closely in a future issue.
Cur eie er means ‘disturb, interfere with, meddle with/in’.
Proverb of the month:
Ta moddey bio ny share na lion marroo. - A living dog is better than a dead lion.
Abbreviations:
FRC - Yn Fer-raauee Creestee (The Christian Monitor), 1763
MBM - Manx Ballads and Music, A W Moore, 1896
PSD - Plain and Short Directions and Prayers, Thomas Wilson, 1707 (appended to
Coyrle Sodjeh)
SW - Sharmaneyn liorish Thomase Wilson (translations of some of Thomas Wilson’s
sermons), 1783
SyC - Shibber y Chiarn (A Short and Plain Instruction For The Better Understanding
Of The Lord’s Supper), Thomas Wilson, 1777
6