Cregeen’s proverbs and sayings
These Manx proverbs and sayings are assembled from Archibald Cregeen, A Dictionary of the
Manx Language…, Douglas: Quiggin, etc., 1835. The translations are mostly from the edition
revised by J. J. Kneen and others, published in 1910, reprinted by Yn Çheshaght Ghailckagh,
Ilkley: Moxon Press, 1984. I have revised the capitalization and punctuation, and added cedillas
(ç), but otherwise left the 1835 spelling unchanged.1 Nearly all of Cregeen’s proverbs and
sayings are collected, with some others, and translated, in G. W. Wood’s article mentioned in
footnote 2 below. The numbers in column 3 below correspond to the numbering in Wood’s
article. The symbol ~ means that the form of the proverb or saying in Wood is a little different
from that in Cregeen. Where the translations differ, those of Kneen et al. are generally superior,
though not always. Where Wood’s translations seem better, I have included them with the
initials GWW. A few translations are my own, indicated with MW.
Max W. Wheeler
Ramsey, January 2015
		Wood2
Caghlaa obbyr aash.	Change of work is rest.	162
Boayl nagh vel aggle cha vel grayse.	Where there’s no fear, there’s no grace.	72
Ta’n aghaue veg shuyr da’n aghaue vooar.	The little hemlock is a sister to the big hemlock, as much as to say, “A small evil or sin is sister to a great one.”	235
Cha row rieau cooid arrit mie.	Offered goods were never good.	~65a*
Ass shilley ass smooinaghtyn.	Out of sight, out of mind.	16
Ny jean balk jeh thalloo mie.	Don’t make a baulk out of good earth. MW	198
S’banglaneagh yn phy’agh.	Prolific is the person.	
Quoi erbee s’beayn cha beayn y ^henndiaght.	Whoever is immortal, ’tis not the aged.	50
S’beayn dagh olk.	Lasting is each evil.	82
Myr sloo yn çheshaght, smoo yn ayrn.	The smaller the company, the bigger the share.	113
Ta keeayll ommidjys, ny slooid ny t’ee ec dooinney creeney dy reayll.	Wit is foolishness, unless a wise man has it to keep.	109
Ta ynsagh coamrey stoamey yn dooinney berçhagh, as t’eh berçhys y dooinney boght.	Learning is the stately clothing of the rich man, and the riches of the poor man.	39
Lesh y vioys shegin jannoo.	You must make do with the life you have. MW	~164
Boght, boght dy bragh.	Poor, poor for ever.	146
S’booiagh yn voght er yn veggan.	The poor are contented with little.	149
1 A few necessary additions or corrections are included in [ ]. < > marks elements for deletion.
2 Wood, G. W., ‘On the classification of proverbs and sayings of the Isle of Man,’ Folk-Lore – A Quarterly
Review, 5 (1894), 237-274. I am very grateful to Christopher Lewin for pointing this publication out to me.
1
Ta fys ec dy chooilley ghooinney c’raad ta’n vraag gortagh eh.	Every man knows where the shoe hurts him.	38
Eshyn nagh gow rish briw erbee t’eh deyrey eh hene.	He who acknowledges no judge condemns himself.	175
Easht lesh dagh cleaysh, eisht jean briwnys.	Listen with each ear, then make judgment	8
Ta aile meeley jannoo bry millish.	A slow fire makes sweet malt.	61
Ta’n vry erskyn y churnaght.	The malt is above the wheat.	193
T’ad beaghey bwoailley er keyt as bwoilley er moddey.	They are living striking on a cat and striking on a dog, i.e. living a cat-and- dog life.	~208*
T’ou er y varney veayl.	Thou art on the bald gap.	
Cha vel eh laccal gerjagh ta goaill soylley jeh aigney booiagh.	He lacks not comfort who enjoys a contented mind.	86
Ayns brishey jeh’n eayst ta mee er vakin moghrey grou cur lesh fastyr aalin.	In the breaking of the moon, I have seen a gloomy morning bringing a fine evening.	191
Soddag chamm, bolg jeeragh.	Crooked bannock, straight belly.	14
Ta fuill ny s’çhee na ushtey.	Blood is thicker than water.	5
Bwoaill choud as ta’n yiarn çheh.	Strike while the iron is hot.	194
Brishys accyrys trooid boallaghyn cloaie.	Hunger will break through stone walls.	47
Cha jarg oo dty choayl y chreck.	You cannot sell your loss.	117
Mannagh vow cliaghtey cliaghtey, nee cliaghtey coe.	If custom be not indulged with custom, custom will weep.	56
Commee obbyr, commee bee.	Partner in work, partner in food.	33
Coontey ny heïn roish ta ny hoohyn guirt.	Counting the chickens before the eggs are hatched.	222
Cha dooar rieau drogh veaynee corran mie.	A bad reaper never got a good sickle.	199
T’ad craa nyn moyrn er y ch[ei]lley.	They are shaking their pride on each other.	100
Cre yiow jeh’n chayt agh y chrackan?	What will you get of the cat but the skin?	209
Faggys ta my lheiney, agh ny sniessey ta my chrackan.	Near is my shirt, but nearer is my skin.	1
Share cragh ve sy çheer, na mee ny mannan çheet stiagh meein.	Destruction in the country is better than the month of the kids (March) coming in fair.	158
Eshyn yiow skeilley, yiow eh craid.	He who receives harm shall receive mockery (be mocked).	95
Ta craplag smoo ayns dty hoyn nish na va ro’ee.	There is a bigger wrinkle in your breech than there was before.	2
Myr sniessey da’n chraue s’miljey yn eill.	The nearer the bone, the sweeter the flesh.	28
Ta cree dooie ny share na kione croutagh.	A kind heart is better than a crafty head.	7
2
Meeyl chreen: Dy beagh ee er e bolg myr t’ee er e dreeym, Shimmey mac dooinney yinnagh ee harrish y cheym.	[Ringworm:] if it were on its belly as it is on its back, many a son of man would it do over the stile.	45
Ta dooinney creeney mennick jannoo carrey jeh e noid.	A wise man often makes a friend of his enemy.	108
Myr smoo siyr smoo cumrail.	More haste, more hindrance. MW	105
Ta airh er cushagyn ayns shen.	There is gold on cushags there.	145
Myr s’doo yn feeagh, yiow eh sheshey.	As black as the raven is, he’ll find a mate.	134
Hig daill gys eeck.	Credit will come to payment.	118
Cha stamp rieau yn dow doo er e chass.	The black ox never trod on his foot.	210
Moyll y droghad myr heu harrish.	Praise the bridge as you go over it.	205
Daa ghrogh eeck t’ayn: geeck rolaue, as dyn geeck edyr.	There are two bad pays: paying beforehand, and not paying at all.	120
Cha vel fer erbee cha bouyr as eshyn nagh jean clashtyn.	None is so deaf as he who will not hear.	17
Un eam gys bee, as jees gys obbyr.	One call to food and two to work.	25
Eddyr daa stoyl ta toyn er laare.	Betwixt two stools the breech is on the floor.	23
Ta bee eeit jarroodit.	Eaten food is forgotten.	26
Ta’n yeean myr e ghooie my vel clooie er e chione.	The chick is like his kind before there are feathers on his head.	139
Geeck cabbyl marroo.	Paying a dead horse.	121
Cha nee yn wooa smoo eieys smoo vlieaunys.	It is not the cow that calls most that gives the most milk.	204
Cha n’eig yn choo ta caaee ny hoyn.	The greyhound is not sluggish which has seeds in its posterior. G.W. Wood	213
Cha dennee rieau yn soogh y shang.	The well-fed never felt like the ill-fed.	48
Roshee daill y dorrys.	Credit will reach the door.	119
Ny three geayghyn s’feayrey dennee Fion Mc Cooil: geay henneu, as geay huill, as geay fo ny shiauill.	The three coldest winds that Finn McCooil felt: thaw wind, wind through holes, and wind under the sails.	186
Cur meer da’n feeagh as hig eh reeisht.	Give a piece to the raven and he’ll come again.	151
Faaid mooar moaney son oie’l fingan.	A big sod of turf for St Thomas’s eve.	208
Foddee yn moddey s’jerree tayrtyn y mwaagh.	The last dog may catch the hare. MW	62
Siyn folmey smoo sheean nee.	Empty vessels make the most sound.	124
Ta fooillagh naareydagh ny smelley na ee scammyltagh.	Shameful leaving is worse than disgraceful eating.	27
Cha bee breagerey credit, ga dy ninsh eh y n’irriney.	A liar will not be believed, though he speak the truth.	89
Surree eh yn flout, my yiow eh yn glout.	He’ll suffer the taunt if he gets the lump.	96
3
Tra ta’n gheay sy villey yiow shiu magh yn ghlass-ghuilley.	When the wind is in the tree you will get the lockman.	173
Freayl y craue glass.	Keeping the bone green.	3
Gien nonney gortey.	Either a feast or a famine.	29
S’giare y jough na yn skeeal.	Shorter is the drink than the story.	31
Cha daink lesh y gheay, nagh ragh lesh yn ushtey.	Nothing came with the wind but what would go with the water.	177
Eshyn nagh bee mie rish e gharran, shegin da’n phollan y chur lesh er e vuin.	He who will not be good to his pony must bring the saddle cloth on his back.	99
Gow coyrl bleb son keayrt.	Take a fool’s advice for once.	110
Gowee bleb rish e voylley as cha gow dooinney creeney rish e phlaiynt.	A fool will acknowledge his praise, and a wise man will not [sic] acknowledge his complaint.	~111
Cha jagh moylley ghooinney hene rieau foddey voish e ghorrys.	A man’s praise for himself never went far from his door.	103*
Cha jean un ghollan-geayee sourey, ny un chellagh keylley geurey.	One swallow will not make summer, nor one woodcock winter.	188
Ta greme ayns traa cooie sauail nuy.	A stitch in time saves nine.	163
My ta’n ghrian jiarg tra girree <t>eh, foddee shiu jerkal rish fliaghey.	If the sun is red when it rises, you may expect rain.	178
Cha vel sonnys gonnys.	Store is no sore.	142
Haghyr eh ny share na hiollee eh.	It happened better than it might have been.	~78
Oie-innyd bee dty volg lane; My jig laa Caisht yiow traast son shen.	On Shrove Tuesday (the eve of the fast) thy belly shall be full; before Easter day comes thou shalt fast for that.	37
Nagh insh dou cre va mee, agh insh dou cre ta mee.	Do not tell me what I was, but tell me what I am.	73
Eshyn lhieys marish moddee, irrys eh marish jarganyn.	He who lies with dogs will rise with fleas.	67
Lhig da’n innagh lhie er y chione s’jerree.	Let the woof lie at the last end.	192
Ta eayst Harn sy Vayrnt dy liooar ayns shiaght bleeaney.	A Saturday’s moon in March is enough for seven years.	179
Jean traagh choud as ta’n ghrian soilshean.	Make hay while the sun shines.	201
Keeayl chionnit yn cheeayl share, mannagh vel ee kionnit ro gheyr.	Bought wit is the best wit, if it be not bought too dear.	107
Kione mooar er y veggan cheilley, as kione beg gyn veg edyr. Towse cheilley rish.	A big head on the little (of wits), and a little head with none at all. Measure sense with it.	21
Ec kione nyn geiley.	At their wits end.	
Cha boght as lugh killagh.	As poor as a church mouse	147
Clagh ny killagh ayns kione dty hie wooar.	A stone of the church be in thy big house, i.e., the kitchen.	127
4
Three kegeeshyn dy chegeeshyn slane, Ta voish laa’l Thomys sy Nollick gys laa’l Breeshey bane.	Three fortnights of fortnights whole; these are from St. Thomas’ Day in Christmas to White St. Bridget’s Day.	240
My ta keim sy laair, bee keim sy [l]hiy.	If there is an amble in the mare, there will be an amble in the colt.	138
Kiangle myr noid, as yiow myr carrey.	Bind as an enemy, and you will have as a friend.	123
Sheeu kishan dy yoan Mayrnt maaill bleeaney Vannin.	A peck of March dust is worth a year’s rent of Man.	180
Yn chiuney smoo erbee geay jiass sniessey j’ee.	The greatest calm of all, the South wind nearest to it; i.e. The greater the calm the nearer the South wind.	176
Tra hig y laa hig eh choyrle lesh.	When the day comes its counsel will come with it.	239
Laa’l Breeshey bane, Dy choolley yeeig lane, Dy ghoo ny dy vane.	White St. Bridget’s Day; every ditch full of black or of white	181
Choud as hig y scell greinney stiagh laa’l Breeshey, hig y sniaghtey my jig laa Boayldyn.	As long as the sunshine appears on St. Bridget’s Day, the snow will come before May Day.	182
Laa’l Moirrey ny gianle, lieh foddyr as lieh aile.	Mary’s Feast Day of the candle, i.e., Candlemas, half fodder and half fire.	154
Laa’l Parick arree yn dow gys e staik as y dooinney gys e lhiabbee.	St. Patrick’s Day in Spring the ox to his stake and the man to his bed.	203
Laa’l Paul ghorrinagh gheayee, Ghenney er y theihll as baase-mooar sleih; Laa’l Paul aalin as glen, Palçhey er y theihll dy arroo as meinn.	St. Paul’s Day stormy and windy, famine in the world and great mortality among people; St. Paul’s Day fair and clean, plenty in the world of corn and meal.	184
Tra ta fer laccal ben, cha vel eh laccal agh ben, Agh tra ta ben echey, t’eh laccal ymmodee glen.	When a man wants a wife, he wants nothing but a wife; but when he has a wife, he wants many (things) clean. [… a great deal. GWW]	131
Ta lane eddyr raa as jannoo.	There is much between saying and doing.	79
Ta lane caillit eddyr y laue as y veeal.	There is much lost between the hand and the mouth.	15
Ta rouyr çhebbyn mie leodaghey mitçhoor.	Too many good offers degrade a rogue.	90
Lhiat myr hoil oo.	(Be it) to thee as thou deservest.	17a*
Cha daink rieau yn baase gyn leshtal.	Death never came without an excuse.	40
Ta booa vie ny gha[a] as drogh lheiy ec.	Many a good cow has a bad calf.	137
Ta dty lhiasagh dty ghoarn.	Thy recompense is thy fist.	22
Share goll dy lhie fegooish shibber na girree ayns lhiastynys.	Better to go to bed supperless than to rise in debt.	30
5
Yiow moyrn lhieggey.	Pride will have a fall.	~101
Leah appee leah lhoau.	Soon ripe soon rotten.	64
Cronk ghlass foddey voym, Loam loam tra roshym eh.	A green hill far from me, Bare, bare, when I reach it.	87
Yn loam leigh, yn loam chair; though some will have it to be, yn loam aggair.	The bare law, the bare right (or wrong).	174
S’loam ta laare y valley vargee.	Bare is the ground of the market town.	155
Lhiannoo ny louyran.	A child or a castling.	
Litçheragh goll dy lhie, litçheragh dy irree, as litçheragh dy gholl dys y cheeill Jedoonee.	Lazy going to bed (lie), lazy rising, and lazy to go to church on Sunday.	97
Ta’n Vayrnt çhionney as yn nah vee fanney.	March tightens and the next month flays.	187
Laa er-meshtey as laa er ushtey.	A day drunk and a day on (i.e. drinking) water.	34
S’mie ve daaney agh s’olk ve ro ghaaney.	’Tis good to be bold, but bad to be too bold.	71
Share soie son veg, na roie son veg.	Better to sit for little than run for little.	77
Cha row rieau bare-lhiam jeant magh.	‘I would rather’ was never satisfied.	75
Millish dy ghoaill agh sharroo dy eeck.	Sweet to take, but bitter to pay.	65
Ceau craue ayns beeal drogh voddey.	Throwing a bone in a bad dog’s mouth	59
Baase y derrey voddey grayse y voddey elley.	The death of the one dog is the grace of the other.	43
Ta ny moddee er chur nyn gione sy phot.	The dogs have put their heads in the pot.	128
Rouyr moddee as beggan craueyn.	Too many dogs and few bones.	212
Cadle[e] ny moddee tra ta ny mraane creearey.	The dogs sleep when the women sift.	161
Foddee fastyr grianagh ve ec moghrey bodjalagh.	A sunny evening may follow a cloudy morning. GWW	183
My yial dyn moll.	My promise without deceit.	~92
Mollee yn molteyr oo my oddys eh.	The rogue will deceive you if he can.	88
Moyll y laa mie fastyr.	Praise a good day in the evening.	
Cha vel eh çheet jesh da moyrn dy yannoo red erbee ta laccal leshtal.	It does not become pride to do anything which needs an excuse.	102
Cha dennee rieau yn voyrn feayraght.	Pride never felt the cold.	103
Lhig dy chooilley vuck reuyrey jee hene.	Let every pig dig for herself.	216
Furree yn mwaagh rish e heshey.	The hare will wait for his mate.	49
6
Laa’l Mian carragh skaa yn arroo sy n’ouyr, as marroo ny eayin sy n’arragh.	St. Matthew’s Day scurvy sheds the corn in the Autumn, and kills the lambs in the Spring. (The feast of St. Matthias is held on the 25th of February, and that of St. Matthew on the 21st of September.)	
Eshyn smoo hayrys, smoo vees echey.	He who catches most shall have most.	143
Mie Mannin, mie Nherin.	Good for Mann, good for Ireland.	242
Ollick vog, rhullic vea.	A soft Christmas, a fat churchyard.	168
Obbyr dyn oardagh, obbyr dyn booise.	Work without order is work without thanks.	~165
Tra t’ou jannoo yn trie jean yn oarlagh.	When thou art making the foot, make the inch.	17a*
Obbyr laa yn ghuilley buigh (or buee), obbyr laue.	The day work of the yellow boy (gold) is hand (manual) work.	166
Yn oghe gyllagh ‘toyn losht’ da’n aiee.	The oven calling ‘burnt breech’ to the kiln. (s.v. oghe) The oven calling ‘burnt bottom’ to the kiln (s.v. gyllagh)	195
Oie mooie, as oie elley sthie, Olk son cabbil, agh son kirree mie.	A night outside and another night inside, bad for horses but good for sheep.	217
Myr s’olk ayn, smessey ass.	The more evil in it, the worse out of it.	85
Lhig dy chooilley ushag guirr e hoohyn hene.	Let every bird hatch its own eggs.	223
Cha nee tra ta’n cheyrrey gee yn ouw te çheet r’ee.	It is not when the sheep eats the marsh pennywort that it comes to her, i.e., the evil effects do not appear till after.	214
Ta daa Pharick jannoo un ghimmagh.	Two small lobsters make a large one.	225
Laa’l Parlane, daa honn goll sy nane.	St. Bartholomew’s Day, two waves going in one. [‘two masses’ GWW]	169
Boayl ta gioee ta keck, as boayl ta mraane ta pleat.	Where there are geese there is dirt, and where there are women there is prattle.	160
Tasht prug[h]ag as ee lughag.	Store miser and eat mouse.	144
7
Ollick ghennal erriu as bleïn feer vie, Seihll as slaynt da’n slane lught thie; Bea as gennallys eu bio ry-cheilley, Shee as graih eddyr mraane as deiney; Cooid as cowryn, stock as stoyr. Palchey phuddase, as skaddan dy- liooar; Arran as caashey, eeym as roayrt; Baase, myr lugh, ayns uhllin ny soalt; Cadley sauchey tra vees shiu ny lhie, As feeackle y jargan, nagh bee dy mie.	A merry Christmas on ye, and a very good year, Long life and health to the whole household; Your life and mirth living together, Peace and love between women and men; Goods and wealth, stock and store, Plenty potatoes and enough herring; Bread and cheese, butter and beef, Death, like a mouse, in the stackyard of the barn; Sleeping safely when you lie, and the flea’s tooth, may it not be well.	
Tra sreaie yn chloie, share faagail jeh.	When the play is merriest, ’tis best to leave off.	153
Ta’n red ta goit dy mie ny share na’n red ta jeant dy mie.	The thing that is taken well is better than the thing that is done well.	74
Cha nee eshyn ta red beg echey ta boght, agh eshyn ta geearree mooarane.	It is not he who has little that is poor, but he who desires much.	148
Lurg roayrt hig contraie.	After spring tide comes neap tide.	63
Slaa sahll er toyn muck roauyr.	Smearing grease on a fat pig’s breech.	215
Ta un cheyr[r]ey screbbagh doghaney yn clane shioltane.	One scabby sheep inflects the whole flock.	68
Tra scuirrys y laue dy choyrt, scuirrys yn veeal dy voylley.	When the hand ceases to give, the mouth ceases to praise.	12
Shaghyn dagh olk.	Shun each evil.	83
Sheayn dty hie as dty aaght; ta’n fer driaght ec dty ghorrys.	Peace to thy house and thy lodging, the chainer is at the door. (Or, preferably, Peace on thy house and lodging, the officer of justice is at thy door.)	~129
Shegin goaill ny eairkyn marish y çheh.	‘Tis necessary taking the horns with the hide.	196
Ta sheshey chammah as ayrn.	A companion is as good as a share.	114
Myr sloo yn çheshaght share yn ayrn; myr smoo yn çheshaght s’reaie yn chloie.	The smaller the company the better the share; the bigger the company the merrier the play.	113, 115
Giare sheear, liauyr shiar.	Short west, long east.	185
Goll thie yn ghoayr dy hirrey ollan.	Going to the goat’s house to seek wool.	211
Myr sniessey da’n oie, slhee mitçhoor.	The nearer the night, the more rogues.	~93
Guilley smuggagh dooinney glen, Inneen smuggagh sluht dy ven.	A snotty boy, a clean man. A snotty girl, a slut of a woman.	11
Cha smooinee rieau er yn olk nagh ren.	One never thinks of the evil one did not do. GWW	84
8
Dy chooilley ghooinney er e hon hene, as Jee son ooilley.	Every man for himself and God for all.	51
Ta’n breagerey molley yn sonderey.	The liar deceives the greedy person. [… the miser. GWW]	91
Sooree ghiare, yn tooree share.	Short courting the best courting.	132
Ta’n chied sponnag lowit.	The first trick is allowed. [The first error is overlooked. GWW]	76
Stiark keayrt ta dooinney siyragh <an> [gyn] seaghyn. [… ass seaghyn. GWW]	A hasty man is seldom without trouble.	106
Dy ve aashagh syn oie, monney shibber nagh ee; Er nonney n’oo plaiynt, ec laccal dty laynt.	To be easy in the night, much supper don’t eat, or else you will complain at wanting your health.	35
Shibber eddrym, lhiabbee ghlen.	A light supper, a clean bed.	36
Skeiy sy doarlish.	A bundle of faggots in a gap.	
Cha vow laue ny haaue veg.	An idle hand will receive nothing.	20
Eshyn ghuirrys sheilley hayrrys skeilley.	He who hatches harm catches harm.	
Raad ta jees ta reih, As raad ta troor ta teiy.	Where there are two there is choice, and where there are three there is pick.	116
Ta drogh hammag ny share na magher foshlit.	A bad bush is better than an open field.	206
Stroshey yn theay na yn Çhiarn.	The people are stronger than the lord.	112
Ta çhengey ny host ny share na olk y ghra.	A silent tongue is better than evil speaking.	4
Tra ta thie dty naboo er aile, gow cairail jeh dty hie hene.	When thy neighbour’s house is on fire take care of thy own house.	125
T’ou towse e arroo liorish dty hubbag hene.	You are measuring his corn with your own bushel.	200
Sniessey yn uillin na yn doarn.	Nearer is the elbow than the fist.	6
Ta ushag ayns laue chammah as jees sy thammag.	A bird is the hand is as good as two in the bush.	207
Woish y laue gys y veeal	From hand to mouth.	13
Share yn olk shione dooin, na yn olk nagh nhione dooin.	Better the evil that we know than the evil which we know not.	81
9