Is there ‘homorganic inhibition’ in Classical Manx? A corpus investigation
R. W. K. Teare & Max W. Wheeler
November 20171
0. Introduction
‘Homorganic inhibition’ in the Gaelic languages refers to the situation where expected lenition
of a word-initial consonant fails when the final consonant of the preceding ‘trigger’ word has
the same place of articulation. The cases usually focused on are those where a word-initial
coronal obstruent /t, tj, d, dj, s, sj/ is preceded by a word also ending in a coronal (/t, tj, d, dj, s,
sj, r, rj, l, lj, n, nj), though we can legitimately ask whether anything similar might be seen when
a word-initial velar is preceded by a velar, or a word-initial labial, by a labial. (There is known
to have been homorganic inhibition more generally in earlier periods of the Gaelic languages.)
We consider the several grammatical contexts in which expected lenition might be inhibited,
looking at evidence from our corpus of Classical Manx texts.2
1.	Regular homorganic inhibition
In certain specified cases in Manx, homorganic inhibition is clearly established. Any grammar
will tell you that d-, j-, t-, çh-, s-, sh- do not mutate after un ‘one’, chied ‘first’, trass ‘third’,
shenn ‘old’, feer ‘very’. Likewise, d-, j-, t-, çh- do not lenite where other consonants do after
the singular definite article y/yn/’n, while here s- and sh- become t- and çh- in a leniting context.
We do not explore further here the issue of variation in lenition after the definite article. The
rule that coronal consonants do not lenite after un, chied, trass, shenn, and feer is, indeed,
confirmed in our corpus;3 there are a few deviations, listed in the Table 1, which are worth
remarking on.
lenition	×	inhibition	×	
un ghorrys	1	un dorrys	3	one door
un yoarree	1	un joarree	0	one stranger
un hreishteil	2	un treishteil	1	one hope
un hooill	2	un sooill	1	one eye
un heeloghe	1	un sheeloghe	4	one generation
un heshaght	1	un sheshaght	2	one company
un heshey4	1	un sheshey	0	one companion
chied ghooinney	1	chied dooinney	5	first man
chied heshey	1	chied sheshey	0	first companion
trass heeloghe	2	trass sheeloghe	0	third generation
shenn ghooinney	18	shenn dooinney	0	old man
shenn gheiney	17	shenn deiney	0	old men
Table 1. Unexpected lenition cases after un, chied, trass, shenn.
1 We are most grateful to Christopher Lewin for his advice on this topic and his very helpful comments on a draft
of this paper.
2 Aght Giare...; Coyrle Sodjey; Book of Common Prayer 1765; Metrical Psalms 1777; Pargys Caillit 1796;
Thomas Wilson, Sermons 1-12; Bible; Apocryphal Books; Yn Fer Rauee Creestee; Cregeen, Dictionary, Lewin:
Manx prose texts in 19th-c. newspapers.
3 NB in Scottish Gaelic, aon, a’ chiad, and seann are among the short list of items after which homorganic
inhibition is regularly observed (Bauer, 2011, 198-202).
4 Sheshey over-lenites: un heshey, chied heshey, ben-heshey/ben-heshee occur exclusively.
Teare & Wheeler
Homorganic inhibition in Classical Manx
Among these examples in Table 1, apart from 13 occasional deviations, the frequent and
invariable expressions shenn ghooinney and shenn gheiney stand out. It may be noted that quite
widely in Classical Manx ghooinney and gheiney are found in various contexts where dooinney
and deiney might be expected.5 In the corpus, there are no exceptions to the rule that coronals
do not lenite after feer ‘very’.
2.	Is there ‘homorganic inhibition’ of lenition after feminine singular nouns in
Classical Manx?
In the corpus, there is a considerable number of examples where a feminine singular noun
ending in a coronal consonant is followed by either an adjective or a dependent noun whose
radical form begins with a coronal obstruent (d-, j-, t-, çh-, s-, sh-). Table 2 sets out the statistics
of observed lenition in this context. There does not seem to be a significant difference between
dependent adjectives and dependent nouns. There is a difference in the way different initial
consonants are treated, with j- and sh- being lenited in 63 per cent or more cases, while d-, t-,
and s- are lenited in 38 per cent or fewer cases. That is, there is rather more ‘inhibition’ with
d-, t-, and s- than with j- and sh-. To set this in context, Table 3 shows comparable statistics
where feminine singular nouns ending in a velar consonant are followed by a homorganic velar-
initial dependent. Here lenition occurs in 69 per cent of the cases, which is comparable to the
proportions where homorganic initial j- and sh- are involved.6
	Nf+A				Nf+N				Total after f.			
7	Hom +len.	Hom –len	Hom total	Hom % len.	Hom +len.	Hom –len	Hom total	Hom % len.	Hom +len.	Hom –len	Hom total	Hom % len.
d-	33	35	68	49	148	59	73	19	47	94	141	33
j-	61	22	83	73	1	4	5		62	26	88	70
t-	31	64	95	33	129	7	19	63	43	71	114	38
s-	19	74	93	20	1	15	16	6	20	89	109	18
sh-	0	4	4		17	6	23	74	17	10	27	63
Totals	144	199	343	42	45	91	136	33	189	290	479	39
Table 2. Lenition of adjective and noun dependents with homorganic coronal-initial
consonants after feminine noun heads
5 For example, in the genitive after masculine, or plural, head nouns, baas ghooinney erbee ‘any man’s death’
(CS), goan ghooinney ‘words of man’ (TW), ymmyd ghooinney ‘the use of man’ (Ap), dow ghooinney erbee ‘any
man’s ox’ (B), garey feeyney ghooinney elley ‘another man’s vineyard’ (B); goo gheiney ‘the word of men’ (TW),
ayns shilley gheiney ‘in the sight of men’ (Ap, B), inneenyn gheiney ‘daughters of men’ (B), obbyr laueyn gheiney
‘the work of men’s hands’ (B), folliaghtyn gheiney ‘the secrets of men’ (B), sharvaantyn gheiney ‘the servants of
men’ (B), feanish gheiney ‘the witness of men’ (B).
6 Much of the data on which these tables are based can be seen in the appendix of Max Wheeler’s paper ‘Survey
of grammatical gender in Classical Manx’ (May 2017).
7 There are too few cases of çh- words in homorganic leniting contexts to count here.
8 Leaving aside cloan gheiney ‘children of men’, which occurs 48 times in the corpus, with 1 × cloan deiney. Once
again gheiney occurs rather more often than might be expected. However, cases of ben ghooinney, cooid
ghooinney, cooinsheanse ghooiney, craid gheiney, feill gheiney, obbyr gheiney, slatt gheiney, are included;
alongside these ben dooinney, cooid dooinney, cooinsheanse dooiney, feill deiney are also attested.
9 10 of these 12 are of the genitive of thalloo: hallooin, which predominantly occurs in this form, even when
lenition would not be expected, such as after a masculine noun head, as in kione hallooin ‘promontory’, mess
hallooin ‘fruit of the land’, room hallooin ‘space’. Diunid thallooin, and obbyr thallooin occur once each.
2
Teare & Wheeler
Homorganic inhibition in Classical Manx
	Nf+A				Nf+N				Total after f.			
	Hom +len.	Hom –len.	Hom total	Hom %len.	Hom +len.	Hom –len.	Hom total	Hom % len.	Hom +len.	Hom –len.	Hom total	Hom % len.
k-/g-	26	6	32	81	8	9	17	47	34	15	49	69
Table 3. Lenition of adjective and noun dependents with homorganic velar-initial consonants
after feminine noun heads
However, in order to decide whether homorganicity is contributing significantly to deviation
from the lenition rule, we need to compare, firstly, what happens when the same feminine
nouns as provide the data in Table 2 are followed by lenitable consonants which are not
homorganic. The results are in Table 4, row a. Here we see that lenition occurs in only 68 per
cent of possible examples, a similar proportion to the incidence of lenition of homorganic
velars, or of homorganic coronals where initial j- or sh- are involved. Secondly, we need to
consider the proportion of lenition of initial coronals in dependents after feminine singular
nouns which do not end in a homorganic coronal consonant. These results are given in Table
4b, excluding the item jesh ‘right’ where the expression laue yesh ‘right hand’ is extremely
frequent (and laue jesh is never found).10 The proportion of lenition of coronal initials after
non-homorganic trigger words (43%) proves to be very similar to as the proportion of lenition
of coronal initials after homorganic trigger words (39%). That is to say, for lenition of coronal-
initial dependents after feminine nouns, the homorganicity or otherwise of a preceding word-
final element is not relevant.
	+len.	–len.	total	% len.
a. Non-homorganic dependents of the f. noun triggers whose homorganic dependents are recorded in table 2	625	299	924	68
b. Coronal-initial targets after non-homorganic f. noun triggers (excluding jesh: 197 examples of laue yesh)	59	78	137	43
Table 4. Lenition of non-homorganic-initial dependents after feminine noun heads
In Table 2, we have seen considerable differences between the lenition behaviour of different
coronal consonants, with j- and sh- strongly favouring lenition, and d-, t- and s- disfavouring
lenition. Though the proportion of lenition of coronal consonants overall is similar in the
homorganic (Table 2) and the non-homorganic (Table 4b) contexts, we may investigate further
whether the differences between the different consonants observed in the former context are
mirrored in the latter. This we do in Table 5, where the data of Table 4b are similarly separated
into the different coronal initials.
10 In fact, the form jesh ‘right’ never occurs as an attributive adjective, but only yesh. We find it with masculine
sg. nouns —lheayst yesh, pillar yesh—, and with plural nouns —nyn laueyn yesh, nyn gassyn yesh. Jesh
‘convenient’ does occur attributively.
3
Teare & Wheeler
Homorganic inhibition in Classical Manx
	+len.	–len.	total	% len.
d-	10	32	42	24
j-	10	23	33	30
t-/çh-	34	8	42	81
s-	0	5	5	0
sh-	5	10	15	33
Total	59	78	137	43
Table 5. Lenition of initial coronals in dependents after f. heads not ending in a homorganic
consonant, cf. Table 4b.
The results are rather different, however. Initial d- and s- resist lenition in both contexts, but
whereas in the homorganic context j- and sh- favour lenition and t- resists it, in the non-
homorganic context, the outcome for these consonants is the opposite. It is not clear to us what
kind of explanation might be sought for this difference. Insofar as t- resists lenition in
homorganic contexts more than elsewhere, we could say there is some confirmation of
(residual) homorganic inhibition in dependents of feminine nouns in Classical Manx. But
insofar as j- and sh- lenite in greater proportion in the homorganic context than elsewhere, we
should have to count that as a tendency towards homorganic disinhibition.
The database for Table 5 is quite sparse; there are relatively few nouns securely identifiable as
feminine that do not end in a coronal consonant, and for which there is evidence from lenitable
dependent adjectives or nouns. Within it there are several frequent collocations, such as cragh
trome ‘great slaughter’ (×7), laue hoshtal ‘left hand’ (×21), laue dooinney ‘a man’s hand’
(×11), çhengey yoarree ‘an unknown tongue’ (×9); these account for 48 of the total of 137
examples. As mentioned above, the overall proportion, 43%, in Table 5 of lenition of coronals
after non-coronal-final heads, is broadly in line with the 39% lenition of coronals in the
homorganic contexts shown in Table 2.
Conclusion: coronal-initial dependent words lenite in not more than 43% of cases on
average after a feminine noun head, independently of whether the head ends in a
homorganic coronal consonant or not.
3.	Is there homorganic inhibition in the case of proper names in the genitive case,
where lenition is the norm?
Of proper names beginning with a coronal obstruent in the Bible + Apocrypha (i.e. names
beginning in D-, J-, T-, S-, Sh-), those in T-, S-, Sh- never lenite in the genitive.11 NB, if they
did, their lenited forms, in H-, would be hard to distinguish from the very many Biblical names
that begin in radical H-.
•	David, Damascus, Daniel, Dibon, and Diblaim (Ghibleam) lenite in the genitive in
90% of cases after a homorganic consonant.
•	There is a large number of Bible names in J- (including Jee, Jerusalem) that lenite,
and they do so in the genitive in 96% of cases after a homorganic consonant. NB
radical-initial Y- names are rare —only Yeesey ‘Jesus’ and Yuaase ‘Judas’.
11 We detect one exception: Jos. 17.8 cheer Happuah ‘the land of Tappuah’. Thomase ‘Thomas’ lenites once in
the vocative: Homase (John 20.29).
4
Teare & Wheeler
Homorganic inhibition in Classical Manx
4.	Is there coronal homorganic inhibition of lenition after a plural noun not ending
in -yn?
After a non-yn plural, lenition of a following dependent is possible. However, in this context,
the occurrence or non-occurrence of lenition of a dependent is to a very large degree determined
lexically, rather than phonologically. So, lenition (including of homorganic coronals where this
is relevant) appears to be the rule after buird, cluig, croink, eayin, goair, moddee, and smeir; 12
whereas non-lenition is the rule after cabbil, deiney, eeanlee, feeaihee, foawir, goan,13 kirp,
mraane,14 spuitt, and nouns in -tee (cummaltee, reiltee, scammyltee, scapailtee, troailtee).
There is variation after buill,15 kirree16 and mec.17 If we only looked at fir, we could believe
the homorganic inhibition rule: 147 cases of lenition of a non-homorganic dependent;18 5 cases
of non-lenition of a homorganic dependent; just one case of lenition of a homorganic
dependent: fir-hie.19
5.	Is there coronal homorganic inhibition after coronal-final prefixes?
First, we need to establish whether, in fact, lenition is found in the case of labial- or velar-initial
roots after a prefix ending in a coronal consonant. The corpus evidence shows that this is
generally the case, though initial f- is only rarely lenited.20 In Table 6, the exceptions to lenition
after coronal-final prefixes are indicated in bold. Where the same lexical stem is treated
variably, we put the variants together, after the first in alphabetical order, and mark both
variants in italic. We include in this list preposed modifiers that may be written with a hyphen,
without taking a position on whether some of them, e.g. ard, might equally well be counted as
preposed adjectives, as we have treated shenn above.
Where coronal homorganic inhibition is in question, both lenition and non-lenition are found.
But the choice between these outcomes is largely lexical. Thus, Wilson uses lenited an-yeeagh
‘atheist’, and an-yeeys ‘atheism’ in his sermons; Cregeen gives anjee ‘atheist’, anjeeagh
‘atheistical’, but these are not otherwise found in the corpus. Con-, far-, giare-, liass-, and
moal- are found with lenition in homorganic initials. Mooar- is found with homorganic
inhibition of lenition, but there are only two examples in the corpus, both with s- (and also one
non-homorganic c-). With ard-, lenition largely depends on the root to which it is prefixed:
note ard hreatoor (PC) ‘arch-traitor’ and ard-hranlaasagh/ard-hranlaasee ‘arch-tyrant’, ard
yymmoose ‘great wrath’. We observe almost always ard-ghooinney and ard-gheiney, variation
with ard sharvvant ~ ard harvaant, ard drogh-gheiney ~ ard ghrogh-gheiney, but otherwise
ard induces homorganic inhibition: ard-saggyrt, ard traa, ard trostey, etc.
12 buird chooney, buird chloaie ×4, cluig veggey ×2, croink gheinnee, croink veggey ×3, croink chasherick, eayin
woirryn ×3, goair woirryn ×2, moddee valloo, moddee voghtey, moddee yiooghey, moddee yooh (Pargys Caillit,
i.e. yoogh), moddee yollyssagh; smeiyr hroam, smeir ghreshagh.
13 Except goan ghooinney ×1, goan gheiney ×2, goan vrynneragh ×1.
14 Except mraane ghoaley, mraane vourey (Cregeen). There are single cases with non-lenition in dew beiyht,
merriu deyrit, builg sheidee.
15 buill hrome, but buill dorraghey.
16 kirree chailjey, kirree vaney, kirree vooarey, kirree woirryn; but kirree cailjey ×4, kirree trome lesh eayin.
17 mec gheiney ×3; but mec deiney ×1, mec joarreeyn, mec mee-chrauee, mec tribeyn elley.
18 Including very frequent fir-chiaullee, fir-choonee, fir vaghee, fir vooinjerey.
19 fir-çheerey ‘countrymen’ ×1, fir tashtee ‘treasurers’ ×2, fir traashtee ‘treaders’ ×1, fir thammag ‘bastards’ ×1;
fir hie ‘householders’ ×1.
20 ard-eallagh ‘chief people’, ard-endeilys ‘mighty protection’ ard-er ‘chief’ ×28.
5
Teare & Wheeler
Homorganic inhibition in Classical Manx
Prefix	_labial	_velar	_coronal
an-	anvennick anmagh anvea anveagh anvio anvroie	an-Chreestee ×14 an-chreesteenyn ×8 an-creesteenyn ×2 an-chooie ×3 an-chredjuagh ×2 an-chredjuee ×4 an-chasherick- ×28 an-ghoo ×18 an-ghooagh an-ghiarey-chymmylt ×15 an-ghiarey-chymyltee	an-yeeagh ×3 anjeeagh (Cr.) an-yeeys ×5 anjee (Cr.) anjeeragh (Cr.)
ard	ard-eallagh ard-endeilys ard-er ×28 ard fer-oik ard-fer-reill ×4 ard-fer-ynsee ard farrane ard-feailley ×3 ard-feaillaghyn ×6 ard-feeuit ard fir-oik ard-firrinys(yn) ard-foayr ×6 ard foayryn ard-foays(yn) ard-marragh ard-pheccah ard-phleayder ard-phooar ard-phrince ard-phryssoon ard-vainshtyr ard-valjyn ard-valley ard-vanglaneyn ard-vannaght ard-vasoonagh ard-vee-viallee ard-veiyht ard-verchee ard-verchys ard-vochilley ard-voggey ard-vollaght ard-volteyryn ard-vooaralagh ard-voylley ard-voyrnagh ard-vriw ard-vunlaa ard-vutler ard-vyghin	ard casherick ×4 ard-chasherick ×2 ard-casherickys ard-chaptan ard-chenjallys ard-cherraghey ard-chiannoortys ard-chiarail ard-chiarailys ard-chiaulleyder ard-kiaulleyderyn ard-chione ard-chlagh ard-chleragh ard-choraa ard-chreeagh ard-chreenaght ard-churmyn ard currymyn ard-churrym ard creaghyt ard-gharraghtee ard-ghennallys ard-gherjaghey ard-ghloyr ard-ghloyroil ard-ghoo ard-ghooagh ard-ghrayse ard-yiat ard-yioot ~ ard-ghioot	ard-danjere ard dooinney ×2 ard-ghooinney ×15 ard-dorrys ×2 ard-gheiney ×107 ard drogh-spyrryd ard ghrogh-spyrryd ard harvant (PC) ard-sharvaantyn ard-hranlaasagh ard-hranlaasee ×2 ard hreatoo(y)r ×4 (PC) ard-jaghin (Cr.) ard Jee ×2 ard-saaseyn ard-saggyrt(yn) (passim) ard-saggyrtys ard-shamyr ard-shamyrder ard shirveish ard-soiagh ard-soiaghey ard soilshean ard-sollys ard-sym ard traa ard tribe ard thie ard trostey ard-tushtey ard yymmoose
6
Teare & Wheeler
Homorganic inhibition in Classical Manx
Prefix	_labial	_velar	_coronal
	ard-wannalagh ard-whuaiyl ard-wooinjer		
con			con-ghorraghey con-ghorraghys con-ghorrid
far	farvane far-ven far-vlaa far-voalley far-folt	far-charkyl far-chass far-chooish far-chloie far-chlashtyn	far-ghuillag
giare		giare-chooat giare-cheeayllagh ×7 giare-cheaut	giare-heillagh ×2 giare-heihltagh ×4 giare-hooillagh
kiare	kiare-filley	kiare-chassagh ×5 kiare-cassagh ×2 kiare-chorneilagh ×3 kiare corneilagh ×3	
liass	liass-vraar liass-vac liass-voir		liass-yishig liass-huyr
moal		moal-chreeagh moal-chredjuagh	moal-hushtagh
mooar	mooar-volgagh	mooar-creeagh	mooar-soiaghey mooar-seaghnit
myn		myn-chyrl	
Table 6. Lenition after coronal-final prefixes
6.	Conclusions
There is coronal homorganic inhibition in Classical Manx after un, chied, trass, shenn and feer,
as is well known. The only non-yn plural noun inducing lenition generally but homorganic
inhibition in a dependent is fir ‘men’. We find also that there is coronal homorganic inhibition
generally after the prefix ard-, with the exception of certain stems. In the other contexts
investigated here, there is variation in lenition, in different proportions depending on the
consonant and the context, but not consistently related to the ‘homorganicity’ of lenitable initial
consonants. Note, in particular, that s- is especially resistant to lenition in these contexts.
Reference
Bauer, Michael, 2011. Blas na Gàidhlig. The practical guide to Gaelic pronunciation,
Glasgow: Akerbeltz.
7