Studies in Manx Gaelic inflection, 6. Initial mutation after er ‘Perfect tense’
1
Studies in Manx Gaelic inflection, 6. Initial mutation after er ‘Perfect tense’ in the Manx
Bible
Max Wheeler, July 2015
The pattern of initial mutation of verbal nouns after er in the perfect tense construction is
anomalous, in that some consonants are subject only to Lenition 1, while others may undergo
either Lenition 1 or Nasalization. In the Manx Bible including the Apocrypha there are enough
examples of the er Perfect construction to get a good perspective on the nature and scope of
the variation in question in ‘Classical’ Manx.
Initial p-, b-, m-, and s-, are invariably subject to Lenition 1.1
To initial vowels, including yee-, n’ is added, an outcome elsewhere characteristic of
Nasalization in the inflection of verbs.2
Verbs beginning with t-, çh-, d-, j-, k-, g-, f- are subject to variable lenition, that is, varying
between Lenition 1 and Nasalization. Or, to be more precise, some verbs beginning with these
consonants are subject to variable lenition. Most verbs beginning with t-, d-, k-, or g-, and some
with initial çh-, undergo Lenition 1 invariably. Some verbs with initial f- undergo Nasalization
invariably. Where there is variation, there are, for the most part, very clear lexical preferences,
for instance, goll strongly favours Nasalization —er n’gholl— (79%), whereas goaill strongly
favours Lenition 1 —er ghoaill— (95%).
1.	Consonants t- and çh-
The following verbs beginning with t- are found only with Lenition 1 in the Perfect tense er
construction in the Bible. The figures are for the number of occurrences in the er construction.
tannaghtyn: er
hannaghtyn (8)
tashtey: er hashtey (2)
teaymey: er heaymey (1)
thoylley: er ho(y)lley (4)
tilgey: er hilgey (27)
toilchin: er hoilchin (3)
tooilleil: er hooilleil (4)
towse: er howse (1)
traastey: er hraastey (1)
traaue: er hraaue (2)
treishteil: er hreishteil
(4)
trial: er hrial (1)
tummey: er hummey (2)
Table 1 is of t-initial verbs subject to variable initial mutation in the er construction, with the
number of occurrences of each, and the percentage of Nasalization cases (rounded to whole
1 E.g. P: er phaagey, er phaartail, er phardooney, er phlaiynt, er phluckey, er phointeil, er phoosey, er
phreacheil, er phrowal, er phuttey;
B: er vaarail, er vaarey, er vaghey, er vaih, er vannaghey, er vashtey, er ve, er veaghey, er ventyn, er
verraghtyn, er vioghey, er vishaghey, er voandyrys, er voggysagh, er voirey, er vrah, er vrasnaghey, er
vreearrey, er vriaght, er vrishey, er vriwnys, er vroie, er vroo, er vuinn, er vuirroogh;
M: er vainshtyragh, er varkiagh, er varroo, er veeooashlaghey, er violaghey, er volley, er vooadaghey, er
vooghey;
S: er hagney ‘shunned’, er harey, er hassoo, er hauail, er heaghney ‘grieved’, er heebey, er heeyney, er heidey,
er heiy, er heyrey, er hiaulley, er hickyraghey, er hirrey, er hirveish, er hoaral, er hoiaghey, er hoie, er
hoilshaghey, er hoilshean, er hooyl, er hoyllaghey, er huill ‘trodden’, er hurranse.
2 A: er n’aarlaghey, er n’aase, er n’ansoor, er n’astyrt, er n’att;
E: er n’eaishtagh, er n’eam, er n’eamagh, er n’earroo, er n’ee, er n’eeasaght, er n’eebyrt, er n’eeck, er
n’êginagh, er n’eginaghey, er n’eiyrt, er n’enmys, er n’etlagh;
I: er n’imman, er n’immeeaght, er n’injillaghey, er n’insh, er n’irree, er n’iu;
O: er n’oanluckey, er n’oardaghey, er n’oardrail, er n’obbal, er n’obbraghey, er n’ooillaghey, er n’ouralley,
Y: er n’yllagh, er n’ymmyrkey, er n’ymmyrt, er n’ynsaghey;
YEE: er n’yeearree, er n’yeeasagh.
Studies in Manx Gaelic inflection, 6. Initial mutation after er ‘Perfect tense’
2
numbers). While tuittym and taghyrt strongly favour Nasalization, troggal, tayrn and treigeil
favour Lenition 1, though somewhat less strongly. Troailt and trostey, neither verb having
many examples, are evenly divided between the two mutations. The strongly favoured variants
are indicated in bold.
In Cregeen’s dictionary, Nasalization after er is indicated also for talkal: er dalkal,
tannaghtyn: er dannaght ~ er dannaghtyn, teaystney: er deaystney, theinniu: er de(i)nniu,
tummey: er dummey, tilgey: er dhilgey, toghtey: er doghtey, toiggal: er doiggal, toilliu: er
doilliu, toilchin: er doilchin or er hoilchin.
	Nasalization	N	Lenition 1	L1	Total	%N
tuittym	er duittym	95	er huittym	2	97	98
taghyrt	er daghyrt	27	er haghyrt	1	28	96
troailt	er droailt	1	er hroailt	1	2	50
trostey	er drostey	2	er hrostey	2	4	50
troggal	er droggal	33	er hroggal	111	144	23
tayrn	er dayrn	6	er hayrn	38	44	16
treigeil	er dreigeil	8	er hreigeil	60	68	12
toiggal	er doiggal	1	er hoiggal	20	21	05
Table 1. Variation in t-initial verbs in the Perfect tense er construction
The following four verbs beginning with çh- are found only with Lenition 1 in the Perfect tense
er construction in the Bible. The figures are for the number of occurrences in the er
construction.
çharbaa: er harbaa (3)	çhionney: er hionney (1)
çhea: er hea (5)	çhymney: er hymney (1)
Table 2 is of çh-initial verbs subject to variable initial mutation in the er construction, with the
number of occurrences of each, and the percentage of Nasalization cases (rounded to whole
numbers). Çheet and çherraghtyn strongly favour Nasalization, while çhaglym and çhebbal
strongly favour lenition 1. Çhyrmaghey, çhyndaa and çhymsagh are more evenly balanced
between the two mutations.
	Nasalization	N	Lenition 1	L1	Total	%N
çheet	er jeet	633	er heet	3	636	100
çherraghtyn	er jerraghtyn	8	er herraghtyn	3	11	73
çhyrmaghey	er jyrmagh(ey)	3	er hyrmaghey	3	6	50
çhyndaa	er jyndaa	39	er hyndaa	50	89	44
çhymsaghey	er jymsaghey	1	er hymsagh	2	3	33
çhaglym	er jaglym	4	er haglym	20	24	17
çhebbal	er jebbal	4	er hebbal	19	23	17
Table 2. Variation in çh-initial verbs in the Perfect tense er construction
Cregeen’s dictionary also gives çhiuchey: er jiughey (sic); he mentions only Nasalization forms
for çherraghtyn, çhymsagh(ey) and çhyrmaghey.
Studies in Manx Gaelic inflection, 6. Initial mutation after er ‘Perfect tense’
3
2.	Consonants d- and j-.
Verbs beginning with d- are subject to Lenition 1.
daunsin: er ghaunsin (2)
deayrtey: er gheayrtey3
(26)
dellal: er ghellal 4 (38)
deyrey: er gheyrey (10)
dobberan: er ghobberan
(4)
dolley: er gholley (3)
dooney: er ghooney (2)
doostey: er ghoostey (4)
dreamal: er ghreamal (1)
dunverys: er ghunverys
(3)
Of the verbs beginning with initial j-, jarrood and jeeaghyn exclusively take Lenition 1: er
yarrood, er yeeaghyn. Of the remainder in Table 3, jannoo and jiooldey strongly favour
Nasalization, while jeigh favours Lenition 1, in 8 cases out of 13.
	Nasalization	N	Lenition 1	L1		Tot	%N
jarrood		0	er yarrood	26		26	0
jeeaghyn		0	er yeeaghyn	41		41	0
jannoo	er n’yannoo	919	er yannoo	16		935	98
jiooldey	er n’yiooldey	9	er yiooldey	3		12	75
jeigh	er n’yeigh	5	er yeigh	8		13	38
Table 3. Variation in j-initial verbs in the Perfect tense er construction
Cregeen also mentions Lenition 1 outcomes for juail: er yuail, and jummal: er yummal. For
jannoo he gives only er n’yannoo.
3.	Consonants k- (c-) and g-
Nearly all verbs beginning with /k/ (k- or c-) undergo solely Lenition 1 in the Perfect tense er
construction. Only five verbs (Table 4) attest any case of Nasalization in this construction, and
only for cosney: er gosney are the numbers more than negligible.
	Nasalization	N	Lenition 1	L1	Tot	%N
creenaghey	er greenaghey	1	er chreenaghey	1	2	50
cosney	er gosney	5	er chosney	53	58	08
kionnaghey	er gionnaghey	1	er chionnaghey	12	13	08
cuirr	er guirr	1	er chuirr(ey)	14	15	07
coyrt	er goyrt	2	er choyrt	645	647	00
Table 4. Variation in /k/-initial verbs in the Perfect tense er construction
Cregeen gives Nasalization outcomes for kiangley: er giangley, and kionnaghey: er
gionnaghey.
3 There is one case of unmutated er deayrtey: Dy vod ooilley yn uill chairagh hie er deayrtey er y thalloo tuittym
erriu, veih fuil[l] Abel cairagh, gys fuill Zecharias ‘That upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon
the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias; Matthew 23.35.
4 There is one exceptional case of ‘Nasalization’ of dellal to n’ghellal: mastey ooilley e ainjyssee cha vel unnane
dy gherjaghey ee, ta ny caarjyn eck er n’ghellal dy foalsey r’ee, t’ad er hyndaa dy ve e noidyn. ‘among all her
lovers she hath none to comfort her: all her friends have dealt treacherously with her, they are become her
enemies.’ Lamentations 1.2. No doubt this is a hypercorrection, based on the observation that some cases of
Perfect er gh- (though from radical g-) are in variation with er n’gh-, e.g. er ghoaill ~ er n’ghoaill. Though taken
literally, Nasalization of initial d- would give n-, this outcome seems never to be found in Manx.
Studies in Manx Gaelic inflection, 6. Initial mutation after er ‘Perfect tense’
4
The great majority of verbs beginning with g- undergo exclusively Lenition 1 in the Perfect
tense er construction, e.g. geid: er gheid, gloyraghey: er ghloyraghey, gra: er ghra. In the case
of verbs beginning with gi- followed by a vowel, the mutated form is spelt either ghi- or yi-,
which I take to be purely orthographic variants. Thus, for example, gialdyn: er ghialdyn ~ er
yialdyn, giarey: er ghiarey ~ er yiarey, gientyn: er ghientyn ~ er yientyn, giootal: er ghiootal ~
er yiootal. The yi- variant is notably more frequent: 79% of cases in the Bible. Nasalization
variants are found for only five verbs: geddyn, gialdyn, gialtaghey, goll, and goaill, and for only
one of these —goll— is the Nasalized variant significantly more frequent (79%) than the
Lenition 1 variant; see Table 5. Goaill has the opposite preference, with 80% Lenition 1: er
ghoaill.5 Gialtaghey occurs only once in the Perfect construction, with a Nasalized outcome: er
n’ghialtaghey.
	Nasalization	N	Lenition 1	L1	Tot	%N
gialtaghey	er n’ghialtaghey	1		0	1	100
goll	er n’gholl	252	er gholl	68	320	79
goaill	er n’ghoaill	68	er ghoaill	272	340	20
gialdyn	er n’yialdyn	3	er yialdyn	20	32	09
			er ghialdyn	9		
geddyn	er n’gheddyn	12	er gheddyn	208	220	05
Table 5. Variation in g-initial verbs in the Perfect tense er construction
In addition to its Lenition 1 variants mentioned above, gialdyn has an infrequent Nasalized
variant, spelt er n’yialdyn.
4.	Consonant f-
The treatment of f-initial words in the Perfect tense er construction differs from that of the
consonants mentioned previously. There are some verbs that are only found with Nasalization:
failleil: er vailleil (9), failley: er vailley (7), fendeil: er vendeil (1), and folmaghey: er
volmaghey (1). In several others Nasalization is predominant; see Table 6. Only fockley magh
shows a very strong preference for Lenition 1. Observe, though, that the variant of Lenition 1
found in the case of f- verbs might rather be seen as Lenition 1 (f- → zero) plus Nasalization
(n’ before initial vowel).
	Nasalization	N	Lenition 1	L1	Tot	%N
fakin	er vakin	200	er n’akin6	12	212	94
fosley	er vosley	31	er n’osley	2	33	94
fuirriaght	er vuirriaght	6	er nuirraght	1	7	86
feaysley	er veaysley	5	er n’eaysley	1	6	83
freayll(ey)	er vreayll(ey)	42	er reayll(ey)	26	68	62
foaddey	er voaddey	6	er n’oaddey	6	12	50
faagail	er vaagail	12	er n’aagail	19	31	39
follaghey	er vollaghey	3	er n’ollaghey	6	9	33
fockley	er vockleymagh	1	er n’ockley(magh)	28	29	03
Table 6. Variation in f-initial verbs in the Perfect tense er construction
5 There is one case (in the Apocrypha) where the Nasalized variant is spelt er n’goaill; there are also two cases of
unmutated er goaill.
6 There are 5 cases of er akin, that is, Lenition 1 without prevocalic n’, all of them in the Apocrypha.
Studies in Manx Gaelic inflection, 6. Initial mutation after er ‘Perfect tense’	5
Cregeen’s dictionary generally gives both alternatives for f-initial verbs. This is the case for:
faagail, faarkey, faastey, fakin, failleil, failley, fanney, farkiaghey, feayraghey, feaysley,
feddanagh, fendeil, festal, foaddey, fockley, follaghey, folmagh(ey), fosley, and fuirraghtyn.
For the following verbs, Cregeen gives only the Nasalization variant: farbagh, fasney,
fassaghey, feiyral, fenaghtyn, feyshtey, fliughey, fordrail, foudaghey, and freaylley ~ freilley.
For these verbs Cregeen gives only the Lenition 1 variant: farraght, foayraghey,
fuillaghtyn, and fuinney.
Studies in Manx Gaelic inflection, 6. Initial mutation after er ‘Perfect tense’
6
Appendix.
Cregeen F
er vaagail ~ er n’aagail	er vassaghey	er vockley ~ er n’ockley
er vaarkey ~ er n’aarkey	er veayraghey ~ er	er vollaghey ~ er
er vaastey ~ er n’aastey	n’eayraghey	n’ollaghey
er vakin ~ er naikin	er veaysley ~ er n’eaysley	er volmagh(ey) ~ er
er vailleil ~ er n’ailleil	er veddanagh ~ er	n’olmagh(ey)
er vailley ~ er n’ailley	n’eddanagh	er vordrail
er vamlagh ~ er	er veiyral	er vosley ~ er n’osley
n’amlaghey	er venaghtyn	er voudaghey
er vanney ~ er n’anney	er vendeil ~ er n’endeil	er vreaylley ~ er vreilley
er varbagh	er vestal ~ er n’estal	er n’uillaghtyn
er varkiaghey ~ er	er veyshtey	er n’uinney
n’arkiaghey	er vliughey	er vuirraght(yn) ~ er
er n’arraght	er voaddey ~ er n’oaddey	n’uirraghtyn
er vasney	er n’oayraghey	
Cregeen G:		
er n’gheddyn	er n’ghialtaghey	er ghlenney
er gherrym	er ghirraghey	er gholl ~ er n’gholl
er ghiallagh(ey)	er ghiennaghtyn	er ghrainney
er ghialdyn ~ er	er yiennaghtyn	er ghreimey
n’ghialdyn ~ er	er ghiootal	er ghreinnaghey
yialdyn	er ghleashaghey	