Variation in Manx lenition: a probe1
Max Wheeler, December 2016
It is well known that initial consonant lenition in Manx is somewhat variable. Acknowledging this might
lead one to suppose that variation, or deviation from the rules, is scattered randomly among the
consonants subject to lenition, and among the contexts triggering lenition. In a small study, using a
corpus that consists of over 1m words of Classical Manx (1700-1850), I show that this is not the case.
Some consonants (specifically s- and f-) are markedly more variable than the rest. Leaving those
consonants aside, there are contexts in which the ‘correct’ application of lenition is virtually categorical,
such as after dy chooilley ‘every’ (which takes Lenition 1: that is, s-, sh- → h-, and all other lenitable
consonants affected). In another context, namely in the prepositional phrase ayns y(n)/’sy(n) ‘in the’
(followed by Lenition 2: that is, s- → t-, sh- → çh-, denti-alveolars t-, çh-, d-, j- not affected, other
consonants as Lenition1), deviation from the rule, for consonants other than s- and f-, is rare but not
negligible: 1.74% of lenition failure.
In both of these contexts, lenition failure for s- stands at around 15 per cent, while, for f-, non-lenition
is around 13% after dy chooilley and around 8% after aynsy(n)/’sy(n). One might have guessed that sh-
would behave similarly to s-, but this proves not to be so. Lenition failure for sh- after dy chooilley runs
at a lower rate than of s- and f-, though more than that of the other consonants; after ayns y(n)/’sy(n) it
runs at about the same rate as for the consonants other than s- and f-.
In the corpus there are 1535 cases of dy chooilley before a lenitable consonant. In only 24 (1.56%) of
these is the consonant not lenited according to the rule. Of these ‘deviations’ two involve çheer
‘country’, with dy chooilley cheer appearing instead of dy chooilley heer (a construction frequent
elsewhere: 22 cases in the corpus). Both of the examples of dy chooilley cheer are in the Metrical version
of a selection of Psalms included at the end of the Book of Common Prayer in Manx (1777). The
remainder consists of 10 cases of unlenited s- (out of 75 —13.33%), two of unlenited sh- (out of 28 —
7.14%), and 10 of unlenited f- (out of 75 —13.33%). Of the cases of unlenited s- words after dy
chooilley, three are of words that do not have a lenited variant attested anywhere in the corpus: seiyr
‘carpenter’, synagogue ‘synagogue’, and slaa-laueeys ‘bribery’. The others, however, do display lenited
variants, not only elsewhere in the corpus, but elsewhere in the dy chooilley context: saase ‘method’
(x3), sorçh ‘sort’, and slieau ‘mountain’. Unlenited sh- appears once in shiaght ‘seven’ (elsewhere dy
chooilley hiaghtoo vleïn ‘every seventh year’), and once in sharvaant ‘servant’: lenited harvaant does
not occur after dy chooilley, but there are over 400 cases of it in other contexts. Of the f- words unlenited
after dy chooilley, two: feeagh ‘raven’, and feoiltys ‘generosity’ have no lenited variant elsewhere in
the corpus; for the others, however, lenited variants are attested in other contexts: fea ‘rest’, failleil
‘failing’, fyrrynagh ‘male’, fastyr ‘evening’ and foays ‘benefit’.
The corpus contains 1722 cases of ayns y(n)/’sy(n) ‘in the’ before a lenitable consonant, with 88
deviations —5.11%. The two main variants, the full form aynsy(n) and the reduced ’syni) are of roughly
comparable frequency (787 : 935), but interestingly the deviations from the lenition norm are
predominantly found in the full form (10.42% deviation), sixteen times more often than after the
reduced form, where deviation from the norm (at 0.64%) is negligible. This fact suggests that reduced
’sy(n) is found in more familiar, well-established, collocations in which correct lenition is more firmly
entrenched. Even so, as with dy chooilley, non-lenition is predominantly found with s- (including sl-)
(15.3%), and with f ■ (8.13%), and these consonants account for all the non-lenitions after ’syni) (6 out
of 935 cases). For the velars and labials (g(i-), c/k(i)-, qu-, b-, m-, p-) non-lenitions make up only 1.74%
of the total. There are no deviations for qu- (33 cases), 0.09% for c/k(i)- (410), 1.35% for m- (224),
1 I am grateful to Christopher Lewin for suggestions and advice on an earlier version of this note, now, I think,
thereby improved.
2.4% for b- (125), 3.3% for g(i)- (121), and 5.17% for p- (58). For sh-, which might be expected to
behave like s-, the rate of non-lenition is in line with that of the velars and labials: 1.97% (of 152 cases).
Some of the examples of non-lenited s- after ayns y(n)/’sy(n) occur in words where the lenited variant
t- occurs elsewhere in the corpus. This is the case for sushtal ‘gospel’ with 12 cases of ayns y sushtal,
even though there are 27 instances of tushtal in the corpus, three of them in the phrase ayns y tushtal.
There is one case of ayns y soilshey ‘in the light’ (John 5.35), though lenited toilshey has 47 occurrences
in the corpus, four of them in the phrase ayns y toilshey. However, most of the examples of non-lenited
s- are found in words that lack a t-initial allomorph anywhere in the corpus: sacrament ‘sacrament’
(x8), sarey ‘order’, seaghyn ‘affliction’, sollysid ‘brightness’, and synagogue ‘synagogue’ (x16). In the
case of variable f- lenition, most of the examples of non-lenition occur in words whose lenited variant
is to be found elsewhere in the corpus: faarkey ‘sea’ (169 examples of aarkey, including 23 of ayns yn
aarkey or ’syn aarkey), fea ‘rest’ (7 examples of ea, including two of ’syn ea), feedoo ‘twentieth’ (x5;
two examples only of eedoo in the corpus), feme ‘need’ (13 examples of eme), firrinys ‘truth’ (9
examples of irrinys), fliaghey ‘rain’ (4 examples of liaghey), foayr ‘favour’ (x4; 19 examples of oayr).
But the following words not lenited after ayns y(n)/’sy(n) have no f-less variant in the corpus: feh
‘sinew’, fine ‘scabbard’, fooillagh ‘scraps’, fraue ‘root’, freoagh ‘heather’, and frynepan ‘frying pan’.
To sum up, this probe indicates that while lenition in Classical Manx is, indeed, variable, the variability
is not evenly spread around the possible lenition targets and contexts. Non-lenition of stops after dy
chooilley is negligible, and after ayns y(n)/’sy(n) does not reach two per cent. Non-lenition is also
negligible after the less formal (more entrenched) variant ’sy(n). In the two contexts investigated here,
non-lenition substantially affects the fricatives (and even here sh- is less affected than s- —the
significance of this distinction is a matter for further research). Why might this be so? One relevant
consideration is that, for f-, its lenited variant, namely zero, is as different from the radical f- as could
be: lenited f-words are not distinct phonologically from any vowel-initial word, and vowel-initial words
are frequent in Manx. The lenited variants of the stops all remain consonantal, and all, except for t- and
çh- (→ h-), retain some oral place of articulation feature (though the contrast between d- and g(i)-, and
between b- and m-, is lost in lenition). For s-, the situation is rather that lenition involves two different
variants, one, h-, without oral place of articulation, and the other, t-, which is an exceptional hardening
in a lenition context, though retaining dental/alveolar place of articulation. (The words slieau
‘mountain’ and straid ‘street’, which are included in this study, display their own special anomalies, in
that slieau has lieau in Lenition 1 and clieau in Lenition 2, while straid has straid, i.e. regular non-
lenition, in Lenition 1 context, and traid in Lenition 2.) In the two cases, f- and s-, word-recognition of
the forms with lenition is somewhat more compromised than in the case of the other consonants.
Speakers seem to have reacted to this difficulty in two ways: one, by becoming more tolerant of failure
of lenition of these two consonants than of others; and two, by adjusting the lexicon so that some s- and
f- words lack a lenited allomorph altogether. More extensive research would be needed to see what
other features, semantic or syntactic, might be shared by the words without a lenition allomorph.