Fin as Ossian revisited:
A Manx ballad in Belanagare and its significance
Zusammenfassung
Der Artikel behandelt eine Fassung der Ballade Fin as Ossian, die im Nachlass von Charles
O’Conor aus Belnagare in der Royal Irish Academy aufbewahrt wird. Bei der Ballade
handelt es sich um eine Variante (in Manx) der Erzählung vom Brand des Hauses Finns,
die in Schottland und Irland weit verbreitet war. Der Artikel enthält den Text der Ballade
mit einer Übersetzung ins Englische, sprachwissenschaftlichen Anmerkungen und einer
Erörterung ihrer Herkunft. Der Artikel spricht sich dafür aus, dass der hier vorgelegte
handschriftliche Text aus dem Jahr 1771 und von dem Altertumsforscher Charles Vallancey
stammt. Seine Bewahrung steht im Zusammenhang mit der Tätigkeit des Philologen und
Sammlers Rev. James MacLagan auf der Insel Man im Sommer 1771.
Introduction
The ballad known to modern scholars as Fin as Ossian¹ ranks highly in the
relatively small corpus of Manx literature. It was, at one time, thought to be
the oldest piece of verse in the Manx language (cf. Wood 1920); however, R.L.
Thomson (1960–61) has since convincingly demonstrated that the song known
as the Manannan Ballad or Manx Traditionary Ballad (henceforth MTB) is, in
strictly linguistic terms, older. Nonetheless, Fin as Ossian retains its importance
in the small literary canon of Manx, not least because it is one of very few extant
examples of fiannaigheacht literature from the Isle of Man, a genre of heroic
literature concerning the hero Finn mac Cumaill, his son Oisín and their retinue,
a genre common to the entire Gaelic-speaking world.² There is a further reason
1	The eighteenth-century English-based spelling Ossian (Irish Oisín, Scottish Gaelic
Oisean), made familiar by the various publications of James Macpherson (see Gaskill
2004: xviii–xix), has been retained here and throughout this article because it is the
form of the name found in the three earliest of the four manuscripts containing the
ballad. Broderick (1990), Wood (1920) and A.W. Moore (1896) spell the name as one
might expect it to occur in Manx orthography (Oshin); however, there is no evidence
for this spelling in any of the eighteenth-century copies of the ballad.
2	For an excellent overview of the literary tradition of fiannaigheacht in Ireland and
Scotland see the various contributions in Arbuthnot and Parsons (2012). Other
examples of fiannaigheacht material in Manx have been edited by Broderick (1981;
1982; 1983). These include a short Manx tale from Edward Farragher, a version of
the tale known in Irish as Fionn sa Chliabhán (Broderick 1981; 1982). Another ver-
Brought to you by | AberystwythUniversity06
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
96
Peadar Ó Muircheartaigh
to regard Fin as Ossian as being of central importance to the Manx literary
tradition. As will be argued below, the circumstances around the collection of
this eighteenth-century ballad provide a unique insight into the preservation
and cultivation of secular Manx literature in the late eighteenth century.
It is generally accepted that much of the interest in the collection and pub-
lication of the Gaelic literature of Ireland and Scotland in the eighteenth and
even into the nineteenth century was driven by the controversy triggered by
the publications of James Macpherson (cf. Meek 2004; Ní Mhunghaile 2009).
Although he was not the first to collect fiannaigheacht material in Scotland —
Jerome Stone, Rev. James McLagan and others had already amassed significant
collections of heroic ballad material³ before the idea had even been suggested
to Macpherson — it was Macpherson’s international success and the ensuing
controversy which gave rise to a market for the publication of genuine Gaelic
heroic literature. This new-found interest in Gaelic literature in the second
half of the eighteenth century quite remarkably spread to the Isle of Man, in
Gaelic terms a culturally remote outpost largely isolated from the rest of the
Gaelic world since the thirteenth century (R.L. Thomson, apud Greene 1976:
67). While a number of variants of this single Manx ballad were published by
Broderick (1990) a quarter ofa century ago, the purpose of this contribution is
to draw attention to one which was not noticed at that time, but is perhaps the
most important variant in helping us to appreciate the late eighteenth-century
cultural and social milieu in which the ballad was ‘collected’, and for the under-
standing of the history of the ballad and the history of Manx secular literature
more generally.
A copy of the Manx ballad Fin as Ossian, in a hitherto unidentified hand,
is found in a composite manuscript of the Royal Irish Academy: RIA ms E ii 1
(746), pages 134; 135. The manuscript in question is a scrap book once belong-
ing to Charles O’Conor of Belanagare (1710–1791), the eighteenth-century Irish
historian, antiquarian and beacon of the Gaelic Enlightenment. Although not
examined by Broderick (1990), scholarship was not entirely unaware of the
existence of this version of the ballad in the Royal Irish Academy. The material
was catalogued by Rev. Charles O’Conor, grandson of Charles O’Conor of Bel-
anagare, in the early nineteenth century (see O’Conor 1818: 171) and is also
mentioned briefly in M‘Lauchlan and Skene (1862: lxxxiv). Most remarkable
of all is the appearance of a transcription of the Royal Irish Academy text in the
Manx Sun newspaper, 27 November 1897, in a contribution by Rev. T. Talbot,
sion of this same tale was collected from a native Manx speaker but published in
English by Morrison (1911: 42–6; cf. Broderick 1982: 171, n. 1). A further example
of a fiannaigheacht narrative in Manx, again from Edward Farragher, Boddagh yn
Cooat Laaghagh, has been shown to be heavily indebted to contemporary nineteenth-
century Irish models found in printed sources (cf. Broderick 1983: 2) and so cannot
be counted as one traditionally found in the Isle of Man.
3	For further discussion and references, see Dunbar (2013: 53–54) and Gunderloch
(2013: 74–84).
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
Fin as Ossian revisited…
97
who was aware of the ballad being mentioned by O’Conor and M‘Lauchlan and
Skene.⁴ Most recently, however, it is listed in RIA Cat., where the history of the
manuscript as a whole is described by Gerard Murphy and Winifred Wulff as
follows:
The difference in size of the pages, the number of scribes, and the wide
range of dates within the limits of the 18th century, as also the con-
stant recurrence of Charles O’Conor’s handwriting throughout the whole
volume, suggest that the ms consists of scraps collected or written by
Charles O’Conor of Belanagare from boyhood on (RIA Cat. 2289).
The relevant portion of the manuscript consists of two adjacent folios
(numbered pages 134 and 135). The first contains a transcription of the ballad
in Manx orthography. The second folio, in the same hand as the first, contains
a transliteration of the Manx text which aims, not always successfully, to con-
form to a more traditional Gaelic orthography. A diplomatic edition of both
folios is given below, along with linguistic notes and my own translation of the
text into English.
4	Talbot’s contribution was part of a larger critique of A.W. Moore’s (1886) edition
of the British Library text (referred to as Text T below). It can be noted that Talbot
thought the entire poem to be an eighteenth-century fabrication. This suggestion can,
I think, be dismissed; the narrative of the ballad diverges sufficiently from Irish and
Scottish models for it to be uniquely Manx but I know ofno suitable English model on
which it might be based. Further, as will be demonstrated below, the ballad appears
to have been part of a larger collection of secular Manx poetry made at the same
time. It can be noted that Talbot was an ultracritical character, even going so far as
to suggest that MTB was an eighteenth-century forgery (cf. R.L. Thomson 1960–61).
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
98
Peadar Ó Muircheartaigh
Texts and Translation
[Page 134: In Manx orthography]
Fin & Ossian
A Manx Cronaght
5
10
15
20
25
Hie Fin as Ossian magh dy helg.
Cha rou ad dooiney ayn, sloo ny keayd
Qui da daag ad ec y thie, agh Orree beg
Daag ec y thie, da chead coo as da chead quellàn
As three chead ben aag, & three chead shen chellagh —
Doort inneen Fin rish inneen Ossian.
Cre’s nee mad craid rish yn Roiee gOrree.
Kienle mad yn olt eckey dys ny cleäyn
As kerree mad yn aile dys y chassyn
Clissht dy dug Orry beg as
Dennee yn smuir ree as y chass.
Hie Orree beg magh roish son y chell
As y spie choinne er y gheallin.
Hoght buirt moarey hug eh lesh as
[gloss: ‘oile: a fire’]
[gloss: ‘spaidh connadh: a bill hook]
[for cutting scrubly or bushwood’]
As hoght cannonyn ayns dagh burt.
Hug eh bart ayns dagh Unniag & dagh Dorryss
Agh er mean y laar, hug eh yn bart sollys.
Va Fin as Ossian, sy tra shoh shelg
Cha row doinney ayn sloo keayd.
Jeagh woar ren cheeney orroo as y ghlen near.
As cheene orroo ny smoo lesh y ghea.
Ree Fin as ree Ossian, derrey daase Ossian skee
Agh Fin moar hene sodjey chum rish ree.
Agh dullee Fin rish Ossian, ’gra dy trome
Cha vel fagit ain, agh Toltanyn follum.
Desunt cetera
Translation:
Fin and Ossian went out hunting / There were no less than a hundred men /
Who did they leave at home but Gorree Beg / They left at home two hundred
hounds and two hundred pups / And three hundred young women, and three
hundred old women / Said Fin’s daughter to Ossian’s daughter: / How shall we
make a mockery of King Gorree / We will tie his hair to the harrows / And we
will put the fire to his feet / Whenever Gorree made a move / [He] felt the bone
marrow running from his foot / Gorree headed out, making for the wood / With
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
Fin as Ossian revisited…
99
5
10
15
20
25
[Page 135: In ‘Gaelic’ orthography]
An Gaoidhligh
Thigh Fin is Ossian amach do shealg
Cha roibh a daoinne ann, sluagh na cead.
Ci do dfhag=ad ag a thigh, ach Orree beg.
Dfhag ag a thigh, da cead cù, is da cead cuilleàn
Is tri chead ben-og, is tri cead sean chailleagh —
Dubhairt ingean Fin ris ingean Ossian
Creas na mad cradh ris an Ri gOrree.
Cengal mad an fholt aige do as an cliathan
As curri mad an oile do as a chossan.
Clist do ttug Orri beg as.
An tan an smaoir rith as a chos.
Thigh Orry beg amach ris an choill
As a spaidh connadh ar a gualan.
Ocht beart mora thug e leis as.
[line not transcribed]
As ocht beart anns da fhinniog is da dorras.
Ach ar meadhon a làr, thug e an beart solluis.
Da Fin as Ossian sa tra so shealg.
Cha roibh daoine ann sluagh na cead.
Deathach mhor rinn sìneadh orra, as a glen n’iar.
As sineadh orra nios mo leis a ghaoth.
Rith Fin, is rith Ossian, deirigh dfhàse Ossian scìth
Ach Fin mor fhein soda cum rish rith
Ag dul Fin ris Ossian, ag radh, do trom
Cha bhfhuil fagad ann, ach Toltanin folamh
[gloss: ‘Toltanin: a fabrick in Ruins’]
his bill hook on his shoulder / He took eight large loads with him from it [the
wood] / With eight bundles in each load / He placed a load in every window
and every door / But in the middle of the floor he placed the lighting load /
Fin and Ossian were hunting at this time / There were no less than a hundred
[with them] / A great smoke spread over them from the glen in the west / and
spread further still over them on account of the wind / Fin ran and Ossian ran,
until Ossian grew tired / But it was the great Fin himself who kept running the
longest / But Fin cried to Ossian, saying sadly / We have nothing left, but empty
ruins.
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
100
Peadar Ó Muircheartaigh
Fig. 1: RIA ms E ii 1 (746), p. 134. By permission of the Royal Irish Academy © RIA.
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
Fin as Ossian revisited…
101
Fig. 2: RIA ms E ii 1 (746), p. 135. By permission of the Royal Irish Academy © RIA.
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
102
Peadar Ó Muircheartaigh
Notes to the text:
1	This line in the ms is followed by ‘Fala-loo & fala-lee’, and the next line is
followed by ‘–Do–’ indicating that this refrain was to be sung after every line.
These are the only two references to the refrain contained in this copy of the
text.
2	Cha rou ad dooiney ayn. Broderick (1990: 58) takes this to be a conflation
of two constructions: cha row ayn dooinney ‘there was not a man’ and cha row
ad dooinney ‘they were not a man (less)’. For Manx (ny) sloo cf. Irish níos / is
lú. Rev. Philip Moore, dealing with another version of the ballad, translates this
line as ‘with not less than a hundred rangers’ (see below and Figure 4).
7	Cre’s nee mad craid rish. The Manx interrogative pronoun crys is not found
in Late Spoken Manx, nor in the Manx Bible but is known elsewhere in the
literature (cf. Broderick 1990: 58). It may have developed from kys ‘how’ (cf.
Irish conas) by analogy with other interrogative pronouns in initial /kr-/ such
as c’red ‘what’, cre ‘where’, c’radd ‘where’, cre’n acht ‘how’, etc. described in
Williams (1994: 719).
Manx craid ‘mockery, derision, humiliation’ (cf. Scottish Gaelic cnàid) is
often combined with the verb jannoo ‘do’, as here with the future tense, cf.
t’eh jannoo craid jeh baggyrt y shleiy ‘he laugheth at the shaking of a spear’
(Job 41:29). Its use with the preposition rish is less common. The line is most
accurately translated as ‘how shall we make a mockery of King Gorree’.
10	Clisst. Kelly (s.v.) defines clysht as ‘a quick sudden and violent motion, a
start, a spring, a gambol’, cf. clis in Irish and Scottish Gaelic. Final <t> here is
a reflex of the tendency, found in other Gaelic dialects, for final /ʃ/ to become
/ʃtʹ/, note also Manx reesht ‘again’ (cf. Irish arís); eisht ‘then’ (cf. Irish éis).
11	Dennee is the preterite of (g)ennaghtyn ‘feel, sense’, (cf. Scottish Gaelic
aithneachadh) and is often used in the corporal sense, e.g. t’ad er my yeeaylley,
as cha dennee mee eh ‘they have beaten me and I felt it not’ (Proverbs 23:35).
16	Hug eh is to be understood as ‘he put’ rather than ‘he gave’. In Manx the
verbs corresponding to Irish cuir ‘put’ and tabhair ‘give’ fall together (cf. Lewin
2015: 76).
18	Va: the ms has Da; this is an obvious mistake for the past tense of the
Manx substantive verb va.
20	ren cheeney orroo. The tendency in Manx is for the verb jannoo ‘do’ to be
used as an auxiliary. Here the preterite ren ‘did’ is combined with the verbal
noun spelt sheeyney ‘stretch, extend’ in the Manx Bible (cf. Irish síneadh). Ex-
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
Fin as Ossian revisited…
103
amples of comparable usage are: ren ny cherubim sheeyney magh nyn skianyn
‘they [cherubims] stretched forth their wings’ (1 Kings 6: 27); T’eh sheeyney
magh e laue er y chreg ‘He putteth forth his hand upon the rock’ (Job 28: 9). In
this regard our text differs from other versions of the ballad which use lhieeney
‘fill, flood’ (cf. Irish líonadh). This variation is likely to have arisen in the copying
process; cheeney could easily be interpreted as lheeney and vice versa without
affecting the overall sense.
22	derrey daase Ossian skee. Manx derrey functions as a preposition and
conjunction with the meaning ‘until’, earlier naggydere mirroring Irish nó go
dtara ‘that it may come’, according to Broderick (1984: 120). The preterite
daase, from aase ‘grow’, has a secondary meaning ‘become’, as in Irish and
Scottish Gaelic so that the phrase is to be translated as ‘until Ossian grew tired’.
23	sodjey ‘farthest, longest’ mirrors Scottish Gaelic as fhaide meaning that
the entire line should be translated as ‘but it was the great Fin himself who kept
running the longest’.
24	Agh dullee Fin rish Ossian, ’gra dy trome. The Manx preterite verb dyllee,
as it occurs in the Manx Bible, is to be connected with the earlier substantive
ilach ‘a shout of lamentation’ (eDIL s.v., cf. yllagh and gyllach in Manx, iolach
in contemporary Irish and Scottish Gaelic). As far as I am aware, only in Manx
does this substantive appear to have undergone verbing: As dyllee ad wheesh
shen s’elgyssee, Jean y chrossey eh ‘And they cried out the more exceedingly,
Crucify him’ (Mark 15: 14).
The burning of Finn’s house by Ree Gorree
The core narrative of the ballad is a familiar one of the fiannaigheacht genre,
although with a decidedly Manx flavour. The ballad recounts the story of the
destruction of Finn’s house by Garadh mac Morna after his being humiliated
by the women of the fían. In most versions of the story this results in Garadh
killing the women and then Garadh in turn being killed by the men of the
fían. This narrative is found in both Irish and Scottish Gaelic oral traditions,
in both song and story, as well as in manuscript sources.⁵ The earliest extant
version of the story is that found in the late twelfth- or early thirteenth-century
compilation known as Acallam na Senórach (Stokes 1900: 38–41; translated in
Dooley and Roe 1999: 42–43). Within the Acallam, the narrative has been
described by Ó hÓgáin as
a startling story of how Fionn and the Fianna went hunting one day and
left their womenfolk…in the care of Garadh mac Morna, who was then
an old man. The women demanded that Garadh play chess with them, and
5	See, for instance, Gwynn (1904), J.F. Campbell (1872: 175–180).
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
104
Peadar Ó Muircheartaigh
when he refuses they teased him, saying that all his strength and vigour
was gone. Angered by this, Garadh lit a great fire in the palace and walked
out, having locked the seven doors (Ó hÓgáin 1988: 154).
Unlike later oral versions such as the Manx ballad, there is no explicit reference
within the Acallam to Garadh having killed the women. With this in mind,
Dooley (2012: 98) sees this narrative within the Acallam ‘as a warning exem-
plum about sources of social unrest: a paradigm of domestic restraint directed
at two potentially verbally uncontrollable sources, women and old men’. To
what extent this really can have been ‘a paradigm of domestic restraint’ is not
at all clear, however. Nagy (2010: 313, n. 14) holds ‘that the telling of the story
in the Acallam renders the conclusion ambiguous at best’ (cf. Nagy 1985: 73–4).
The later oral versions of the narrative, including the Manx version given above,
show no such restraint and listeners are left in no doubt but that Garadh, or in
the Manx case his avatar Gorree, exacted a cruel revenge on his female com-
panions. It therefore seems likely, as suggested by Nagy (2010: 310–11), that
the ambiguity of the Acallam is in fact part of a ‘process of chivalrisation’ of
a pre-existing, and if later distributions are to be trusted, ubiquitous and more
gruesome narrative (cf. Ó Corráin 1987; hÓgain 1988: 154).⁶
There is one development particular to the Manx narrative that must be
noted. In all Manx versions of the ballad a legendary character of the fían,
Garadh mac Morna, has been conflated with the eleventh century Godred
Crovan († 1095), king of Mann and the Hebrides, known as Guðrøðr in Norse
and as Gofraid Méránach⁷ in the Gaelic of the period. This eleventh-century
dynast gained legendary status in Manx tradition as the patriarch of a Manx
dynasty lasting nearly two centuries (McDonald 2007: 64; Hudson 2005: 170–
174; Woolf 2005). Known in Manx as Ree Gorree or Ree Orree,⁸ it is as a dynastic
patriarch that Godred Crovan is most famously described in MTB, where he is
also alleged to have been the first king of Mann:
Myr shen eisht ren adsyn beaghey
Gyn dooinney ayn yinnagh orroo corree
Agh goll dy gheddyn pardon veih’n Raue
Er-derrey haink eh huc Ree Gorree
Lesh e Lhuingys hrean as Pooar y Ree
As ghow eh Thalloo ec y Laane
6	For detailed discussion of the importance of this narrative within the larger structure
of the Acallam see Parsons (2008: 18–21).
7	On this name and epithet, see Ó Maolalaigh (2014).
8	Both bynames occur in the present text: Orree at lines 2, 10 and 12; Gorree at line
7. The lower case <g> followed by upper case <O> in line 7 might be indicative
of a process of editorial revision which will be discussed in greater detail below.
On the development of King Orree from King Gorree due to misplaced juncture, see
Broderick (1990: 58).
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
Fin as Ossian revisited…
105
Shen y chied er ec row rieau ee
Dy ve ny Ree er yn Ellan
Cha geayll mee dy ren eh skielley ec Purt
Chamoo ren eh marroo aynjee
Agh aym ta fys dy daink jeh Sluight
Three Reeaghyn jeig jeh Ree Gorree
Now the land was in peace and prosperity, and no one at all troubling
them, but going to seek forgiveness at Rome at last there came to them
King Orry.
With a mighty fleet and the king’s power he landed at the Lhen; he was
the first whose fate it ever was to be a king in the island.
I have not heard that he did any damage in harbour, neither did he slay
therein, but I know that there came of his seed thirteen kings from King
Orry (R.L. Thomson 1960–61: 542–545).
In this important sense Fin as Ossian represents an interesting synthesis of
the Gaelic fiannaigheacht tradition and Norse traditions of the Isle of Man not
found in either Ireland or Scotland⁹ but seen elsewhere in Manx oral literature
(cf. Bruford 1986–87: 43–44; A.W. Moore 1891: 27–29).
The manuscript and relationship to other variants
As the Royal Irish Academy text has not previously been examined in any detail,
it is useful in the first instance to place it in the context of the other copies of
the ballad. Broderick (1990) counts three manuscripts containing the ballad;
the details are worth revisiting:
Manuscript M: This manuscript is now lost but was ‘written on the back of a
leaf of an old copy book’, according to Wood (1920: 297). The text is in
the hand of Rev. Philip Moore (1705–1783), best-known as the general
editor of the Manx Bible.¹⁰ It consists of 27 lines in total. The last two
of these lines appear scribbled on the reverse of the page, indicating
that they were added later. The Manx text was published in facsimile by
Wood (1920), along with a translation into English, also in the hand of
Moore. The English translation contains material not found in Text M but
corresponding to Text W.¹¹
9	There is also a Manx folk-tale incorporating some elements of the basic narrative of
the burning of Finn’s house, conflated with yet another tale (cf. Christiansen 1931:
213–214).
10	For a short biographical account of Rev. Philip Moore, see Butler (1799: 186–205).
11	See figures 3 and 4.
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
106
Peadar Ó Muircheartaigh
Fig. 3: Facsimile of Text M as published in Wood (1920), in the hand of Rev. Philip
Moore.
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
Fin as Ossian revisited…
107
«rft ,4 Mrf,
*# ^ ^ ^'^"fl, ';
.4*/- ii/^rtS &*&%&&■ *
pMA y. ^ »^‘;
"• t^-Z' - zz ^r
“«* 4-zp^
Fig. 4: Facsimile of a translation of Text W as published in Wood (1920), in the
hand of Rev. Philip Moore.
:»./ AM
* Jr^t i,
Jj£0*
^^ ^ & Jfo4 /^ Jfrif
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
108
Peadar Ó Muircheartaigh
Fig. 5: p. 1 of MNHL ms 1487(d)C (Text W), in the hand of John Kelly. © Manx
National Heritage.
Manuscript W: Preserved as Manx National Heritage ms 1487(d)C and written
in a hand which neither Wood (1920) nor Broderick (1990) identified.
The text consists of 29 lines in total, ‘the last [line] being inserted at
a slightly later date by a different hand according to Broderick (1990:
51). This manuscript does not contain a translation of the text but the
translation enclosed along with the Manx Text M corresponds closely to
this text.¹²
12	See figures 4, 5 and 6.
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
Fin as Ossian revisited…
109
Fig. 6: p. 2 of MNHL ms 1487(d)C (Text W), in the hand of John Kelly. © Manx
National Heritage.

Manuscript T: This is part of the Thorkelin Collection in the British Library,
Add. 11215, in the hand of Peter John Heywood (1739-1790).¹³ It consists
of 41 lines.
13	This is one of a small number of Manx texts and vignettes sent to the eighteenth-
century antiquarian G.J. Thorkelin during his tour of Britain and Ireland (cf. Flower
1926: 604–606). For further information on Thorkelin’s tour see Kiernan (1983). For
an insight into Thorkelin’s interaction with late-eighteenth century Gaelic literary
culture, most especially in a Scottish context, see Ó Muircheartaigh (2014).
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
110
Peadar Ó Muircheartaigh
The manuscripts containing Text M and Text W are dated by Broderick (1990)
to 1762 or 1763, but this dating of both manuscripts is essentially unsound, as
will be set out below. Manuscript T is part of a larger collection of Manx material
sent by Peter John Heywood to Professor Grímur J. Thorkelin in October 1789.
The texts of M and W are closely related. Text T, on the other hand, has the
appearance of a significantly elaborated text. As to the relationship between M
and W, Broderick has noted that:
The similarity of the texts in M and W suggest that they have been taken
down from the same informant, and the irregularity of metre and the
incompletion of couplets, if that is what it is, would suggest imperfect
memory on the part of the informant and/or that the text was not very
well noted down (Broderick 1990: 54).
Rather than suggesting that the text ‘was not very well noted down’, the mean-
ing of which is ambiguous, it might be more accurate to suggest, in light of the
close relationship between M and W, that they were transcribed from the oral
recitation of the same informant and that the orthographic differences between
them indicate Text W was the subject of editorial revision. The copy in the hand
of Moore accompanies a translation of the final lines of W that are, curiously,
not found in M.¹⁴ This serves to emphasise once again the close relationship
between Texts M and W. Although neither Wood (1920) nor Broderick (1990)
identified the hand of Text W, comparison with other material in the Manx Na-
tional Heritage Library indicates it is in fact that of John Kelly (1750–1809).¹⁵
Kelly was the amanuensis of Philip Moore and was centrally important to the
final stages of the production of the Manx Bible.¹⁶ This then accounts for the
similarity between the two texts. If, as seems likely, Text W is the product of
an editorial revision of Text M, then the most notable editorial intervention, be-
sides the addition of the final lines, in Text W is the exclusive use of Gorree (x5)
rather than Orree. These facts suggest that Text M and Text W were produced
around the same time.
To the texts discussed by Broderick we may now add that printed above
and once in the possession of Charles O’Conor of Belanagare, which I will call
14	These lines recount Gorree hiding from Fin and Ossian under a rock before being
found and killed (see Broderick 1990: 55–56), reminiscent of other versions of the
ballad where Garadh hides in a cave before being found by his pursuers (cf. J.F.
Campbell 1872: 176).
15	This alone is sufficient to negate Broderick’s (1990) suggestion that Text W was
written in the first years of the 1760s; Kelly would have been too young to be the
scribe.
16	Moore, in a letter dated 1 May 1772, noted that he could not have so readily completed
the work ‘without the assistance of Mr Kelly, a very ingenious young man, trained
up for this service, and a candidate for holy orders; who has been from the first my
adjutant in revising, and correcting, and now transcribing a fair copy of the whole
Bible’ (quoted in R.L. Thomson [1969]: 185–6, n. 5).
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
Fin as Ossian revisited…
111
Text B.¹⁷ It is immediately clear that the Royal Irish Academy text, Text B, does
share a common source with Text M, the now-lost text in the hand of Moore.
This is perhaps most clear in the title of the ballad in both manuscripts: ‘Fin &
Ossian a Manx cronaght’.¹⁸ The punctuation of lines 2 and 3 along with the use
of the ampersand & instead of Manx as ‘and’ at lines 5 and 16 also indicate that
Text B was copied either directly from M or from an extremely close copy (see
figure 3). Neither this title, punctuation, nor the use of the ampersand is found
in the other versions (Text W or Text T). By way of further explication of the
relationship between Texts B and M, one can note that the initial line of Text M
reads: Hie Fin as Ossian magh Lhaa dy Helg. The word Lhaa here, however, is a
later addition to the text (see figure 3). Its inclusion is not seen in Text B but does
occur in W. The occurrence of Da at line 18 of Text B, an obvious mistake for Va,
the past tense of the substantive verb, might be indicative of two things. First,
the transcriber of Text B was not very familiar with Manx (a fact supported
by the many misunderstandings that are apparent in the ‘Gaelic’ transcription).
Second, the transcriber certainly did not have recourse to a speaker of Manx
when undertaking the transcription and transliteration.
Of all the eighteenth-century manuscript copies of the poem it is Text B in
the possession of Charles O’Conor of Belanagare and Text M in the hand of
Philip Moore which are the most closely related. This is clearly an important
point in determining the provenance of Text B and in the explication of the
history of the ballad more generally and requires further elaboration.
Provenance of Text B
The immediate source of Text B was Charles O’Conor’s close associate, the en-
gineer and amateur linguist Charles Vallancey (1731–1812).¹⁹ Not only is this
indicated by a comparison of Text B with Vallancey’s hand in the Vallancey-
O’Conor correspondence in the Royal Irish Academy, but Vallancey obligingly
17	The presence of an item of fiannaigheacht material in Charles O’Conor’s papers is
noteworthy in light of his description of the genre as ‘amusement for the vulgar,
recited in various shapes to this day among them’ (O’Conor 1783: 653–654; see also
Mac Craith 2015: 185–186).
18	Broderick (1990: 51, n. 3) is correct in his observation that the facsimile image of
Text M is not as clear as one might like. Nonetheless, he appears to be mistaken in his
interpretation of the title of Text M as ‘A Manx ronag’. This is to assume the existence
of a Manx word **ronag ‘short song/poem’, not otherwise attested in Manx as far as
I am aware. This assumption appears to rest on a misunderstanding of Irish rannóg
as being derived from rann ‘quatrain, stanza, verse’. The word rannóg does exist in
Irish but it is not derived from rann ‘quatrain, stanza, verse’. Comparison with Text B
allows one to confirm that the word is in fact cronnaght, defined in Kelly’s dictionary
as ‘a catch, a glee, a short and witty air or song, a dirge or ditty’ (Kelly 1866, s.v.
cronnane).
19	For an account of Vallancey’s very varied life, see Nevin (1993).
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
112
Peadar Ó Muircheartaigh
confirms it in the same correspondence. In a letter to O’Conor dated 3 Septem-
ber 1771 Vallancey notes that:
My correspondent in the Isle of Man has picked up a curious fragment
of Ossian, I have attempted to correct the orthography on the opposite
page, which wants your further correction – I am certain you will think
the matter interesting enough to thank me for communicating it – he
promises more which is in the hands of some old people in the island
(RIA ms B i 2).
Vallancey was fascinated by the Manx language and went on to gain some
awareness of the repertoire of Manx literature. Later in the 1770s, Philip Moore
was in touch with Vallancey and may have even visited Vallancey in Dublin in
1774 (see Butler 1799: 657; 670). Vallancey also had a little-known pioneering
role in publishing Manx literature; his is the earliest surviving printing of a
section of the MTB, in the fourth volume of his Collectanea de Rebus Hibernicis
(511; 551) in 1786.²⁰ All of these manifestations of Vallancey’s interest in Manx
are later than the date of his letter to O’Conor, suggesting that at the time of
his obtaining the poem, Vallancey was still a mere novice in terms of Manx
language. His attempt at a transcription of the ballad into Gaelic orthography
supports this assessment.²¹ While Vallancey’s interest in and treatment of Manx
sources is deserving of a much fuller treatment it is sufficient for present pur-
poses to note that Text B of Fin as Ossian was communicated to O’Conor by
Vallancey in September 1771. This does not answer the question of who sent
the ballad to Vallancey in 1771, however. Who was Vallancey’s ‘correspondent
in the Isle of Man’ and was this person the conduit through which Vallancey’s
subsequent interest in Manx literature was developed?
It is indicative of Charles O’Conor’s wide-ranging interests, not to mention
correspondents that the provenance of the Manx text should be bound up with
the provenance of another non-Irish Gaelic text in the collection: Alasdair mac
Mhaighstir Alasdair’s Birlinn Chlann Raghnaill. Both texts occur side by side in
20	This text of the MTB which was published by Vallancey is taken from what he de-
scribed as ‘an ancient chronicle of Man, printed in the Manks, 1778’. R.L. Thomson
(1960–61: 521) noted that no copy of this 1778 publication could be found but it would
appear that there was one copy known to Gill (1932: 433) who claimed that ‘[o]nly
one copy of the Rhymed Chronicle in Manx, printed in Douglas as a popular pamphlet
in 1778, is known to exist’. Unfortunately, Gill did not elaborate on the location of
the volume but it may yet come to light.
21	It appears, perhaps unsurprisingly, that Vallancey never made much real headway in
terms of being able to understand Manx (cf. R.L. Thomson [1969]: 206–207, n. 2). That
Vallancey employed the services of the scribe Muiris Ó Gormáin to teach him Irish is
well known and often cited in the literature (cf. Ó Cuív 1986: 416; McCaughey 1967–
68: 203; Mac Cathmhaoil 2013: 27). That Vallancey appears to have made minimal
progress in his acquisition of the language is acknowledged less-often (cf. Ó Muraíle
2015: 208).
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
Fin as Ossian revisited…
113
O’Conor’s composite manuscript. As noted in RIA Cat., the manuscript is essen-
tially a scrap book of items collected from O’Conor’s childhood onwards.²² The
Manx and Scottish Gaelic texts have not only been set beside one another in this
scrapbook, they are written on the same sized paper and have the appearance
of having been folded together at some point prior to binding. Both poems are
written on paper bearing a common ‘Maid of Holland’ watermark with a ‘Pro
Patria’ motto.²³ Rev. Charles O’Conor, possibly aware of this, thought both
poems to have been written in the same hand, giving the following somewhat
acerbic description of the poem in his catalogue of his grandfather’s manu-
scripts:
‘Fin and Ossian, a Manx Coronacht’. This is the title of one sheet of paper
in the Manx language on one side, with a version in common Irish on
the other. It is in the same modern hand and characters with the preced-
ing [Birlinn Chlann Raghnaill], and is the composition of some ignorant
schoolmaster who blunders ris for re, and makes Fin and Ossian, and their
300 young women, and their 300 hags, 100 dogs, and 100 whelps, keep
company together, whilst the former are cutting faggots with their bill
hooks! Perhaps the poems of Ossian are not founded on better authorities
(O’Conor 1818: 171).
While both hands unmistakably belong to the eighteenth century and do share
certain similarities, RIA Cat. correctly distinguishes between the hand of the
Scottish Gaelic text and that of the Manx text. Further, although both texts
are written on paper bearing similar watermarks, a closer examination reveals
that the countermarks are in fact distinct. The Manx text is written on paper
bearing the countermark of Jan van der Ley, a Dutch papermaker of the eigh-
teenth century, while the Birlinn bears that of the famous French papermaker
J. Villedary.²⁴ The distinction in the hands and in the paper notwithstanding, it
would appear that the both the Manx and the Scottish Gaelic texts are intim-
ately connected in another way, as will now be demonstrated.
The hand of Birlinn Chlann Raghnaill is that of Rev. James McLagan (1728–
1805), the Scottish scholar, clergyman and prolific collector of Gaelic litera-
ture.²⁵ This is clear when the text is compared to the McLagan-O’Conor letters
22	I have no knowledge as to when these materials were bound together but they had
been arranged and bound in this order by 1818 at the latest, for they are catalogued
as such by Rev. Charles O’Conor (1818: 171).
23	For examples, see Churchill (1935: xciii–cxviii).
24	For further information on these paper makers, see Gravell & Miller (1983: 241–
242; 230).
25	This Royal Irish Academy text of Birlinn Chlann Raghnaill was edited by J.L.
Campbell (1961), who was unable to identify the hand. For a fuller discussion of
the implications of the identification of McLagan as the scribe in question, see
Ó Muircheartaigh (forthcoming a).
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
114
Peadar Ó Muircheartaigh
in RIA.²⁶ McLagan spent much of the late 1760s in Ireland as a military chaplain
to the 42nd (Royal Highland) Regiment of Foot, better-known in some quarters
as the Black Watch, and appears to have been based in Dublin in 1769 and
1770. McLagan soon took advantage of this posting to acquaint himself with a
number of Irish scholars and antiquarians with similar Gaelic literary interests.
In his letters to O’Conor, McLagan mentions Charles Vallancey, Dr Carpenter
(Catholic Archbishop of Dublin),²⁷ and Muiris Ó Gormáin²⁸ by name, indicating
that he was firmly ensconced in O’Conor’s Dublin circle of savants, scholars
and scribes. McLagan was not to remain in Dublin, however. After spending
part of the summer of 1770 in Scotland, he was posted to Belfast and from June
1771 to the Isle of Man.²⁹
While interesting fragments of the McLagan-O’Conor correspondence are
preserved among O’Conor’s papers in the Royal Irish Academy, no correspond-
ence between McLagan and Vallancey has survived, as far as I can ascertain.
They undoubtedly did correspond, however, and they certainly shared texts of
mutual interest. McLagan mentions Vallancey in his letter to O’Conor in the
spring of 1771, implying that Vallancey had promised to obtain a copy of Bul-
let’s Celtic dictionary for him.³⁰ Sìm Innes (2016) has also recently presented
evidence suggesting that McLagan and Vallancey exchanged texts. For reasons
that will now be outlined, one can be confident that Text B of Fin as Ossian,
and a transliteration into a more ‘Gaelic’ orthography came to Vallancey via
McLagan during the summer of 1771, not long after McLagan arrived in the is-
land, and that McLagan was Vallancey’s mysterious ‘correspondent in the Isle
of Man’.
26	These letters are contained in RIA ms B i 2.
27	It was around the time of McLagan’s visit to Dublin that Carpenter became arch-
bishop of Dublin. For a useful discussion of Carpenter’s life and career, see Mac
Giolla Phádraig (1976).
28	McLagan mentions ‘Gorman’; I take this to be Muiris Ó Gormáin, the Gaelic scribe
rather than the Chevalier Thomas O’Gorman. Muiris Ó Gormáin spent much of 1771
in the employ of O’Conor transcribing material in Belanagare (cf. Ní Mhunghaile
2015: 215; Flower 1926: 144). Innes (2016) has recently argued persuasively that
material from Ó Gormáin came into McLagan’s possession via Vallancey; material in
Ó Gormáin’s hand is also to be found among other papers once belonging to McLagan
but not preserved in Glasgow (see Ó Muircheartaigh, forthcoming b).
29	R.L. Thomson (1961: 9) suggested that McLagan was stationed as chaplain to the
42nd Regiment in the Isle of Man ‘about the year 1770’ (cf. D.S. Thomson 1958: 180,
n. 1). Reference to the correspondence of McLagan and O’Conor in the Royal Irish
Academy (ms B i 2) allows for the more precise date of the middle of June 1771. The
letters also confirm that McLagan spent at least the summer of 1770 in Scotland.
30	The publication in question was Jean-Baptiste Bullet’s Mémoire sur la langue celtique,
contenant l’histoire de cette langue et un dictionnaire des termes qui la composent
(Besançon, 1754).
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
Fin as Ossian revisited…
115
Linguistic Profiling
In order to fully appreciate the history of the ballad, the close textual relation-
ship between Text B and Text M must now be examined. Text M, as we have
seen, is in the hand of Rev. Philip Moore, part-translator and general editor
of the Manx Bible. Moore is not the scribe of Text B, however, Vallancey is.
One could not expect a Manxman of this period to be able to ‘Gaelicize’ the
orthography of the Manx original (cf. R.L. Thomson [1969]: 193–194) and it is
clear from both his transcription of the Manx and his attempt to ‘correct the
orthography’ that Vallancey did not understand much if any of the original text.
One or two examples will suffice to demonstrate this. The opening word of the
ballad in Manx hie ‘went’ (cf. Irish chuaigh; Scottish Gaelic chaidh) is rendered
into ‘Gaelic’ orthography by Vallancey as thigh. Vallancey also misinterprets
the past tense of the substantive verb, va, copying instead da. These features of
his copy show that Vallancey did not understand even the most basic parts of
the text.³¹ Yet there are other examples of more obscure (to an Irish audience
at least) linguistic features of the text which have been faithfully transmitted
in Vallancey’s pseudo-Gaelic orthography, suggesting that the transliteration
was not entirely the work of Vallancey. The retention of forms like the nega-
tive particle cha and the preposition ris suggests that Vallancey had been sent a
transliteration into a more traditional Gaelic orthography which he further ‘cor-
rected’. Alongside cha and ris, there are a number of other features which sug-
gest that this more traditional orthography was that of Scottish Gaelic rather
than Irish:
Jeagh woar ren cheeney orroo as y ghlan near
‘a great smoke spread over them from the glen in the west’
Is relatively accurately transliterated as
Deathach mhor rinn sìneadh orra, as a glen n’iar
The word deatach ‘smoke’ is disyllabic and retains intervocalic [t] intact in
all Irish dialects in which the lexeme is commonly used (cf. Wagner 1958:
160). This is not the case in Scottish Gaelic, where deathach is well-attested
(Borgstrøm 1940: 178; Ó Murchú 1989: 325; cf. McLeod 2004: 32), correspond-
ing with the situation in Manx (Broderick 1984: s.v. jaagh). One can also note
the occurrence of the grave accent throughout the text, in line with the Scottish
Gaelic New Testament of 1767, as indicative of Scottish origins (cf. D.S. Thom-
son 1983: 100; Black 1994: 134–135). The same can be said for the title given to
the Gaelic transliteration; ‘An Gaoidhligh’ is best understood as Scottish Gaelic
meaning ‘in Gaelic’. Most clearly indicative of the origins of the text sent to Val-
31	I think they are also sufficient to indicate that Vallancey was equally ignorant of the
narrative.
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
116
Peadar Ó Muircheartaigh
lancey are three glosses on Text B, ones which must have been made in a very
specific environment. These glosses will now be examined.
Gloss 1
The Manx word aile meaning ‘fire’ is glossed as such in our text. Manx does
not use a reflex of the Old Irish lexeme tene ‘fire’ found as the usual word for
‘fire’ not only in the other Gaelic languages³² but also in Welsh and Breton
(cf. Wagner 1953). This lexeme, aile, which Wagner (1953) noted had strong
nasalization of the initial vowel, is, etymologically speaking, identical with an
earlier form, aingel, meaning ‘light’ or ‘bright’, a lexeme etymologically distinct
from but homophonous with the Latin loanword aingeal ‘angel’. The former
occurs in Sanas Cormaic and is glossed solus nó grianda nó fáilid ‘light or
sunny or joyous’ (Meyer 1913: 8). It has the appearance of a rare lexeme, even
in the early period, and eDIL (s.v.) only records its use twice, both times in
glossaries, a fact which further supports the suggestion that the lexeme was
not common. The Manx lexeme aile displays the loss of intervocalic <ng>, a
phonological development also found in Ulster and Scotland, and is confirmed
by the nasalization of the vowel (Ó Baoill 2001; cf. Broderick 1986: 105–6).
The use of the lexeme aingeal as the usual word for ‘fire’ appears as rare in
Modern Irish as in Old Irish (cf. Wagner 1958: 164). Dinneen (s.v.) defines
it as ‘a burnt out cinder taken from the fire sometimes given in their hands
as a protection to children going out at night, is called an aingeal, as it is
supposed to represent an angel’, a definition which demonstrates how two
once distinct lexemes have become conflated in folk etymology. In Scottish
Gaelic the situation is perhaps a bit more complex in that there are a number
of realisations of the lexeme, none of which is particularly common: The word
aingeal specifically meaning ‘the fire in a kiln’ was known in South Uist and
Skye³³ and Lhuyd recorded it meaning ‘fire’ in Argyll at the very start of the
eighteenth century (Campbell and Thomson 1963: 223–223). Phonologically
related ain and aine are noted by Carmichael (1887: 85) as forms particular
to the Western Isles, meaning ‘bright fire, red fire’. Dieckhoff (s.v. aingir) in
his dictionary of the dialect of Glengarry notes the related form aingir as a
word meaning ‘fire’ he further notes that it is ‘not in common conversation’. In
short, while certain Gaelic dialects show phonological variations of an original
aingeal ‘fire’ only in Manx does a form akin to aile occur and only in Manx
is it the usual generic term for ‘fire’. The evidence indicates clearly, then, that
from the Manx orthography, a speaker of Irish or Scottish Gaelic would not be
32	Although there are reflexes of this lexeme in Manx: çeeney-jee ‘ringworm’
(Broderick 1984: s.v.), cf. teine-dè in Scottish Gaelic and tine dhia in Irish; chent ‘a
flash’ (Cregeen 1835: s.v.).
33	Fieldwork Archive, Digital Archive of Scottish Gaelic (DASG). University of Glasgow
http://www.dasg.ac.uk/fieldwork/?q=aingeal+ [accessed 15 June 2016]. Cf. McDon-
ald (1958: s.v.).
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
Fin as Ossian revisited…
117
reasonably expected to be able to decipher the Manx word aile. This lexeme
is, within a larger Gaelic context, distinctly and exclusively Manx and explains
why it is glossed in our text.
Gloss 2
The second gloss on the text consists of the following: ‘spaidh connadh: a bill
hook for cutting scrubly or bushwood’. The term spie choinne is described by
Broderick (1990: 59) as ‘a mattock for hooking gorse’, broadly agreeing with
the gloss in our text. The specification of a tool used for hooking gorse seems to
be reliant on one speaker of Late Spoken Manx (cf. Broderick 1984: s.v. speiy
conney). It may be better to describe it as an implement for cutting firewood
more generally as conney in Late Spoken Manx incorporates ‘heather, furze,
gorse; fuel, firewood’ (cf. Broderick 1984: s.v.). The term used in other versions
of the ballad is tuaigh chonnaigh:
Éirghes Garaidh thall astoigh
Gabhas n-a láimh tuaigh chonnaidh
Do bhain san gcoill gan tséna
Naoi ngúala fuinnsiona imthréna
Garaid arose and went forth from the house: he took in hand the wood-
man’s axe: he cut in the wood, ’tis past denial nine stout faggots of ash
(Gwynn 1904: 18–19).
This initial element, spie, is entirely incomprehensible to speakers of Irish and
Scottish Gaelic³⁴ and therefore can be viewed as uniquely Manx.
Gloss 3
The third gloss on the text consists of the following: ‘Toltanin: a fabrick in ruins’.
The Manx word tholtan is described by Kelly (1866: s.v. tultan) in his dictionary
as meaning ‘a ruin, a decayed house’, it is glossed in our text as ‘a fabrick in
ruins’. The lexeme is unknown in Irish and Scottish Gaelic but was common
in both Late Spoken Manx (Broderick 1984: s.v. tholtan) and the Anglo-Manx
of the last century (Moore 1924, s.v. thalthan). Broderick (1984: s.v. tholtan)
has been suggested that it is related to older tolltach ‘sharp, piercing’ but if so
the Manx lexeme shows a significant semantic development not seen in either
Scottish Gaelic or Irish.
This linguistic digression is important in elucidating the identity of Vallan-
cey’s ‘correspondent in the Isle of Man’. The fact that words which are common
34	Broderick (1984: s.v. spoi; 1990: 59) suggests that this element might be a doublet of
spoiy ‘castrating’ (cf. Irish spochadh). This etymology is far from certain.
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
118
Peadar Ó Muircheartaigh
in Manx but unknown in Irish and Scottish Gaelic are glossed in the text indic-
ates that whoever sent it was not only drawing on knowledge of Manx, but
also on knowledge of Scottish Gaelic and/or Irish. This indicates that the text
as sent to Vallancey has its origins in a collaborative effort between a Manx
speaker or speakers and someone familiar with Irish or Scottish Gaelic in the
Isle of Man. There is no other viable way of accounting for the glosses. Moore
had insufficient knowledge of Irish to be aware of what needed to be glossed
and Vallancey’s mutilated transcription of the original and transliteration into
‘Gaelic’ orthography indicates that he did not understand it. And yet some fea-
tures in Vallancey’s ‘corrected’ transliteration of the Manx text betray a Scottish
source. These facts lead us back to Rev. James McLagan (1728–1805), a friend
of Vallancey and a Scottish-Gaelic speaking clergyman intensely interested in
fiannaigheacht literature (cf. D.S. Thomson 1958) who, as already pointed out,
was posted to the Isle of Man in the summer of 1771 as a military chaplain to
the 42nd Regiment.
The linguistic profile outlined above is supported by the fact that McLagan
and Moore, the scribe of Text M, the version most closely related to our Text
B, were very well acquainted. John Kelly (1750–1809), scribe of Text W, acted
as a copyist, editor and assistant to Moore during the translation of the Manx
Bible.³⁵ Kelly would go on to compile a dictionary of Manx, noting the following
in his description of the Gaelic languages:
When the Rev. Philip Moore and myself [i.e. Kelly] were engaged in pre-
paring the Manks translation of the Holy Scriptures for the press, the Rev.
— McLagan, chaplain to his Majesty’s 42nd Regiment of Highlanders, fre-
quently visited us and often assisted us in the recovery or the application
of obsolete words…(Kelly 1866, s.v. Gaelck).
McLagan’s interests were every bit as literary as they were biblical, however,
and these interests were not allowed to fade during his time in the Isle of Man.
McLagan was not one to miss an opportunity to add to his already substantial
collection of Gaelic literature. R.L. Thomson has noted that:
The traffic between the Gael and the Manxman was not all in one dir-
ection…for if McLagan assisted them…there is also among McLagan
manuscripts [in Glasgow University Library] one piece of evidence that
Philip Moore communicated Manx popular verse to their visitor, who
had no doubt been inquiring after the oral literature of the island (R.L.
Thomson 1961: 10).
This small Manx manuscript, in the possession of McLagan but in the hand
of Philip Moore is preserved in Glasgow University Library (GUL ms Gen
1042/180).³⁶ In light of the evidence of Fin as Ossian presented here, this Glasgow
35	For more on Kelly see R.L. Thomson ([1969]: 185–186; 1987–89).
36	For discussion see R.L. Thomson (1961).
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
Fin as Ossian revisited…
119
manuscript may be just the tip of a more substantial iceberg of collaboration.
The evidence then points squarely at collaboration between McLagan, Moore
and Kelly in the collection of Manx literature and its commitment to writing.
This is the context from which Text B emerged. McLagan had met Vallancey
the previous year when stationed in Dublin and had no doubt been party to the
debates around the veracity of Macpherson’s Ossian in which both Vallancey
and Charles O’Conor were participants (cf. Ó Muircheartaigh, forthcoming
b). The correspondence with both men continued after McLagan had left Dub-
lin.³⁷
The date of the ballad
With a greatly enhanced understanding of the provenance of the existing copies
of the ballad, it may now be possible to usefully discuss the question of its
date, or more accurately the date it was first collected from oral recitation.
Broderick (1990: 51) dated Text W and M to circa ‘1762/1763’.³⁸ That date is
entirely reliant on the following account of Peter John Heywood (1739–1790)
communicated to Grímur Thorkelin in October 1789:
Several years ago, when the first Edition of the Poem of Fingal and Os-
sian by Mr. McPherson appeared, a Revd. Clergyman of my acquaintance,
(since deceased) was then at the Bishop’s Country Seat [Bishop’s Court]
in this Isle, engaged with one of the Vicar’s Genl in revising and correct-
ing a translation of the Scriptures into the Manx Language, and telling the
Vicar Genl. of that new production (of which he read him some Episodes
in the hearing of the Bishop’s Gardiner, an old Man, who was at work
near the Door of their Laboratory and listening. He stept in on hearing
frequent mention of Fingal and Oshian & Cuchullin &c and told him he
knew who could sing a good song about those men & C[u]chullin, and
that was his Brother’s Wife, a very antient Woman. (on which they sent
for the old Dame, who very readily sung them eight or ten verses which
my friend immediately took down in writing, and the next day on recol-
lection she bro[ugh]t them the rest, and of which he obliged me with a
copy…. My friend asked her, wher she learned this song, and she said
from her Mother & Grandmother & many more (that they used to sing
them at their work and wheels…(quoted in Broderick 1990: 52; cf. BL
Add. 11215).
Macpherson published Fragments of ancient poetry, collected in the Highlands
of Scotland, and translated from the Gaelic or Erse language in 1760 and this
37	For discussion of the relationship between McLagan and Vallancey after the latter’s
departure from Ireland, see Innes (2016).
38	In doing so he follows Flower (1926: 605) who states that ‘[t]his seems to have been
in 1762, when the Rev. Philip Moore and the Rev. Matthias Curghey (Vicar General)
were at work on the translation of the Bible’.
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
120
Peadar Ó Muircheartaigh
was followed by others.³⁹ Taking Heywood’s account at face value, Broderick
(1990: 52) dated the collection of the ballad to 1762 or 1763. The comments of
Heywood, however, relate to Text T. If Text T did indeed come to Heywood
directly from Moore it seems likely that it did so much later than 1771. There
is certainly an attraction in the suggestion that all versions of the ballad have
their ultimate origin in a single encounter with ‘the old Dame’, however, similar
to that described by Heywood, not least because all extant copies bear a version
of the same title: Fin as Ossian. Nonetheless there is reason to doubt much of
the other details provided by Heywood.⁴⁰
The clergyman described in Heywood’s account is obviously Rev. Philip
Moore, the scribe of Text M, of which our Text B is most likely a copy. Moore,
as already pointed out, was responsible for the translation of the Bible into
Manx. The identity of the second clergyman mentioned in the account is not so
certain.⁴¹ Such is the vagueness of Heywood’s description of the episode that
I do not believe one can pin down a date for the events described in the letter.
If, however, one assumes that all manuscript copies of the ballad have their
origin in a single encounter similar to that described by Heywood in his letter
to Thorkelin, then it may be that James McLagan, Philip Moore and John Kelly
were all present. Would it have been possible for a native Manx-speaker in the
eighteenth century to have been completely unaware the existence of Ossianic
lore on the island? This is the scenario implied by Heywood in his letter to the
Icelandic antiquarian. The survival of remnants of Ossianic material in Manx
oral culture into the twentieth century would surely argue against any such
interpretation of the admittedly meagre evidence. Moore and his Manx clerical
counterparts may not have been able to recite Ossianic ballads in Manx but is
it not farfetched to suggest they would not know of their existence? It is easier
to imagine that the type of encounter described by Heywood could have been
brought about by the presence of the inquisitive McLagan, who within a matter
of months of his arrival on the island was already communicating its Ossianic
lore to Vallancey. McLagan’s reference, reported by Vallancey in the latter’s
39	For a useful outline of Macpherson’s subsequent publications see Gaskill (2004:
xviii–xix).
40	One further reason to doubt Heywood’s account may be that he claims the source of
the ballad was ‘an old dame’. Traditionally, in Ireland at least, fiannaigheacht material
seems to have been the preserve of men, although not exclusively so (cf. Ó Duilearga
1942: 43). If Heywood’s account in this regard is accurate, however, it challenges
the traditional interpretation of the fiannaigheacht genre as being the preserve of
men, at least as far as the Isle of Man is concerned. One can also note the following
observation of Edward Faragher (1831–1908), the last native writer of Manx, and a
source of much Manx folklore: ‘I have heard an old woman saying when I was a child
something about Fin McCooil, but I’ve forgotten most of it. It was a bit like a song;
she would sing it to the children to keep them quiet…It seemed to me that the kids
were afraid of Fin MacCooil’ (translated in Broderick 1982: 171).
41	Broderick (1990: 52) assumes it was the Rev. James Wilks (1719–1777) although no
evidence for this being the case is presented.
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
Fin as Ossian revisited…
121
letter to Charles O’Conor, stated that ‘there is more in the hands of some old
people in the island’. This comment does not indicate that Moore had amassed
a collection of verse before McLagan’s arrival in the island.
With the central role of McLagan in the collection of the ballad Fin as Ossian
now secure, one can return to Text W, the text now known to be in the hand of
John Kelly. One of the most notable differences between Text W and all others
is the exclusive use of the name Gorree in Text W where Text T uses Orree, or a
variation there of, exclusively (x5), and Text M has four instances or Orree and
one instance of Goree. The fact that Garadh mac Morna, a legendary character
of the fían, became conflated with Godred Crovan, an early king of Mann, has
already been noted. The exclusive use of Gorree (as opposed to Orree) in Text W
is unusual and one may well ask if the scribe was aware that in the greater
part of the Gaelic world the character in question was Garadh, with initial
<G>. There is, of course, only one relevant person that would have had that
knowledge at his disposal.⁴² McLagan was intimately familiar with the Scottish
Gaelic ballad; there are two different Scottish Gaelic versions of the ballad in
his collection, now preserved in Glasgow University Library.⁴³ One need only
recall John Kelly’s description of McLagan having helped Kelly and Moore ‘in
the recovery of obsolete words’ to see clearly the context in which Orree might
be ‘restored’ to Gorree.⁴⁴
McLagan was a remarkable character, so much so that his is, I believe, a
unique achievement. He had been collecting Gaelic ballads and songs as early
as the 1750s so that by the time Macpherson was thinking about publishing
his works, McLagan was already acknowledged as a leading expert on Gaelic
oral literature.⁴⁵ Everywhere McLagan went he sought out texts of songs and
poetry; his Scottish collection is the most extensive, for obvious reasons, but
he also collected material in Ireland and the Isle of Man (Innes 2016; Thomson
1961; Ó Muircheartaigh forthcoming b). For these reasons, it is unthinkable
that McLagan would not have taken advantage of an opportunity to obtain ‘a
fragment of Ossian’ in the summer of 1771. Ifmy interpretation of the evidence
is valid, then Texts B and M are to be dated to the second half of 1771, by which
42	It has already been noted above that Vallancey displayed a remarkable ignorance of
both the narrative and language of the ballad.
43	GUL Gen ms 1042/82 contains 22 quatrains bearing the rather long title Oran a rinnead
air na Fionnaibh an uair a Dhagadh Garrie maille re Mnaibh na feine an ann Tigh
Thormaig agus a loisg è an Tigh nan Tiomchiol; GUL Gen ms 1042/95 is simply titled
Tigh Formail and consists of 26 quatrains (see D.S. Thomson 1958). The second of
these has been printed in Cameron (1892: 352–355).
44	For discussion of a similar sort of ‘restoration’ on the part of Kelly and Moore, ap-
parently on account of McLagan, see R.L. Thomson (1961: 9). This relates to the use
of muc-awin (literally meaning ‘river-pig’) in the Manx Bible where English ‘bear’
is intended. This Thomson attributes to McLagan’s suggestion of mathghamhain (as
found in Bedell).
45	See James Macpherson’s letters to McLagan published in Saunders (1968: 146–147).
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
122
Peadar Ó Muircheartaigh
time McLagan had taken up residence in the Isle of Man. Text W most likely
dates from not long after and probably represents a version which was akin to
Texts M and B but which has undergone some editorial revision, possibly with
input from McLagan, and the addition of five further lines at the end of the
ballad. Text T which is greatly elaborated appears to represent this original
version of the ballad after having been added to by subsequent informants
and/or redactors in the two decades between McLagan’s arrival on the island
and Heywood’s letter to Thorkelin. This scenario is suggested by the fact that
all versions of the poem use the title Fin as Ossian (spelt Oshian in the case of
Text T) and by Heywood’s claim that the ultimate source of Text T was Philip
Moore.⁴⁶
Conclusion
The limited size of the Manx corpus of fiannaigheacht literature might lead
one to believe that the genre did not enjoy the same popularity in the Gaelic-
speaking Isle of Man that it so obviously did in Ireland and Scotland. The discus-
sion of the ballad here, however, cautions against such a reading of the evidence.
The literary output of the Isle of Man throughout the entire eighteenth century
is if not exclusively then certainly overwhelmingly religious (cf. Broderick
2007). It is remarkable that any secular literature at all was preserved. Of that
extant secular literature, fiannaigheacht, it could be argued, is appropriately
represented relative to the Irish and Scottish material.
The arrival of a charismatic, energetic and learned Scottish Gaelic-speaking
clergyman in the Isle of Man accounts for the preservation of the present ballad
and others (cf. R.L. Thomson 1961). McLagan had, by the time of his posting in
the Isle of Man, amassed a wealth of knowledge of fiannaigheacht literature (in
both Irish and Scottish Gaelic) which has hardly been matched, before or since.
His presence in the Isle of Man is likely to have had an invigorating effect. It
now seems likely that the arousal of interest in Manx secular literature in the
early 1770s (cf. Broderick 2007: 41) was directly connected with the presence
of a major collector of Gaelic literature in the Isle of Man from the summer of
1771 onwards. McLagan’s role in this Manx enterprise is, like so many other
aspects of his varied career, deserving of further analysis.⁴⁷
This re-examination of Fin as Ossian has shed significant light on the history
not only of this ballad but on an important period in the history of secular
literature in Manx. It is especially worth recalling that the observations made
here would not be possible but for the presence of this single ballad among
46	This seems to have been acknowledged more recently by Broderick (2007: 41) who
states that ‘[t]he manuscript [sic] dates from ca. 1770’, although the reasons for this
change of heart are not specified. Further examination of the process by which Text
T was ‘elaborated’ would prove worthwhile.
47	I intend to discuss McLagan’s role in the preservation of Manx secular literature more
generally elsewhere in the near future.
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
Fin as Ossian revisited…
123
the papers of Charles O’Conor. The text examined here, in the hand of an
Anglo-Irish antiquarian, is preserved among the papers of an Irish historian and
Gaelic scholar, but was collected by a Scottish collector in collaboration with at
least two Manxmen. The circumstances of its collection and preservation shed
further light on the complex intricate personal networks of antiquarians and
native scholars which throughout the late eighteenth century salvaged so much
Gaelic literary heritage from ruin. Further, the story of Fin as Ossian emphasises,
once again, the extent to which so many aspects of Gaelic language, literature
and culture from Ireland, Scotland and the Isle of Man shed mutual light on one
another and are often only best examined in their fuller, pan-Gaelic, context.
Acknowledgement:
I am very grateful to Culture Vannin for the award of a grant which made
archival research for this article possible. I am also grateful to Christopher
Lewin, Wilson McLeod, Geraldine Parsons and an anonymous reviewer who
read and offered comments on an earlier draft of this article. My thanks to
library and archival staff at the Royal Irish Academy and Manx National Heri-
tage for their assistance. Portions of this article have been presented in Dub-
lin, Aberystwyth and Douglas. I am grateful to those who offered comments
on those occasions, most especially Liam Breatnach and Ian Hughes, and to
Adrian Caine for much practical assistance in Douglas. All remaining errors
and inaccuracies are mine alone.
References
Arbuthnot, Sharon, & Geraldine Parsons (ed.), 2012: The Gaelic Finn tradition.
Dublin: Four Courts Press.
Black, Ronald, 1994: ‘Bog, loch and river: the nature of reform in Scottish Gaelic’, in:
I. Fodor & C. Hagège (ed.): Language reform: history and future, Vol. 6. Hamburg:
Helmut Buske Verlag, 123–148.
Borgstrøm, Carl, 1940: The dialects of the Outer Hebrides. Oslo: H. Aschehoug &
Co.
Broderick, George, 1981: ‘Manx stories and reminiscences of Ned Beg Hom Ruy
(introduction and texts)’, Zeitschrift für celtische Philologie 38, 113–178
Broderick, George, 1982: ‘Manx stories and reminiscences of Ned Beg Hom Ruy
(translation and notes)’, Zeitschrift für celtische Philologie 39, 117–194
Broderick, George, 1983: ‘Boddagh yn Cooat Laaghagh: A Manx version of a
Fenian tale’, Béaloideas 51, 1–10.
Broderick, George, 1984: A handbook of late spoken Manx: dictionary. Tübingen:
Niemeyer.
Broderick, George, 1986: A handbook of late spoken Manx: phonology. Tübingen:
Niemeyer.
Broderick, George, 1990: ‘Fin as Oshin’, Celtica 21, 51–60.
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
124
Peadar Ó Muircheartaigh
Broderick, George, 2007: ‘Manx Gaelic literature: an overview’, in: Jan Erik Rek-
dal & Ailbhe Ó Corráin (ed.): Proceedings of the Eighth Symposium of Societas
Celtologica Nordica. Uppsala: Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis, 39–49.
Bruford, Alan, 1986–87: ‘Oral and literary Fenian tales’, Béaloideas 54/55, 25–56.
Butler, Weeden, 1799: Memoirs of Mark Hildesley, D.D. Late lord bishop of Sodor and
Mann; and master of Sherburn hospital under whose auspices the Holy Scriptures
were translated into the Manks language. London.
Cameron, Alexander, 1892: Reliquiae Celticae: texts, papers, and studies in Gaelic
literature and philology. Ed. Alexander Cameron & John Kennedy. Inverness:
Northern Chronicle.
Campbell, John Francis, 1872: Leabhar na Féinne: heroic Gaelic ballads. London:
Spottiswoode & Co.
Campbell, John Lorne, 1961: ‘The Royal Irish Academy text of Birlinn Chlann Ragh-
naill’, Scottish Gaelic Studies 9, 39–79.
Campbell, John Lorne & Derick S. Thomson, 1963: Edward Lhuyd in the Scottish
Highlands 1699–1700. Oxford: The Clarendon Press.
Carmichael, Alexander, 1887: ‘The place-names of Iona’, Scottish Geographical
Magazine 3.2, 80–87.
Christiansen, R.T., 1931: The Vikings and the Viking wars in Irish and Gaelic tradi-
tion. Oslo: Dybwad.
Cregeen, Archibald, 1835: A dictionary of the Manks language with the correspond-
ing words or explanations in English. Douglas: J. Quiggan.
Churchill, W.A., 1935: Watermarks in paper in Holland, England, France etc., in the
XVII and XVIII centuries and their interconnection. Amsterdam: Hertzberger.
Dieckhoff, Henry Cyril, 1932: A Pronouncing Dictionary of Scottish Gaelic based on
the Glengarry dialect. Edinburgh: W. & A.K. Johnston.
Dooley, Ann, 2012: ‘The deployment of some hagiographical sources in Acallam na
senórach’, in: Geraldine Parsons & Sharon Arbuthnott (ed.): The Gaelic Finn
tradition. Dublin: Four Courts Press, 97–110.
Dooley, Ann & Harry Roe. 1999: Tales of the elders of Ireland. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Dunbar, Robert, 2013: ‘Vernacular Gaelic tradition’, in: Sarah Dunnigan & Suz-
anne Gilbert (ed.): The Edinburgh companion to Scottish traditional literatures.
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 51–62.
eDIL: Electronic dictionary of the Irish language. <www.dil.ie> [accessed 29
June 2016]
Fieldwork Archive, Digital Archive of Scottish Gaelic (DASG). University of
Glasgow <http://dasg.ac.uk/fieldwork> [accessed 29 June 2016]
Flower, Robin, 1926: Catalogue of Irish manuscripts in the British Museum, volume
2. London: British Museum.
Gaskill, Howard (ed.), 2004: The reception of Ossian in Europe. London and New
York: Thoemmes.
Gill, W.W., 1932: A second Manx scrapbook. London and Bristol: Arrowsmith.
Gravell, T. & G. Miller, 1983: A catalogue of foreign watermarks found on paper
used in America 1700–1835. New York: Garland.
Greene, David, 1976: ‘The preposition i n- as subject marker’, Celtica 11, 61–67.
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
Fin as Ossian revisited…
125
Gwynn, E.J., 1904: ‘The burning of Finn’s house’, Ériu 1, 13–37
Gunderloch, Anja, 2013: ‘The heroic ballads of Gaelic Scotland’, in: Sarah Dun-
nigan & Suzanne Gilbert (ed.): The Edinburgh companion to Scottish traditional
literatures. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 74–84.
Hudson, Benjamin, 2005: Vikings, pirates and Christian princes: dynasty, religion
and empire in the North Atlantic. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Innes, Sìm, 2016: ‘Fionn and Ailbhe’s riddles between Ireland and Scotland’, in:
Matthieu Boyd (ed.): Ollam: a Festschrift for Tomás Ó Cathasaigh. Madison, NJ:
Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 271–285.
Kelly, John, 1866: The Manx dictionary. Douglas: The Manx Society.
Kiernan, K. 1983: ‘Thorkelin’s trip to Great Britain and Ireland, 1786–1791’, The
Library 5.1, 1–21.
Lewin, Christopher, 2015: ‘A Manx sermon from 1696’, Zeitschrift für celtische Philo-
logie 62, 45–96.
Mac Cathmhaoil, Nioclás, 2013: Muiris Ó Gormáin: beatha agus saothar fileata.
Indreabhán: An Clóchomhar.
Mac Craith, Mícheál, 2015: ‘Charles O’Conor and the Macpherson controversy’,
in: Luke Gibbons & Kieran O’Conor (ed.): Charles O’Conor of Ballinagare: life
and works. Dublin: Four Courts Press, 165–185.
Mac Giolla Phádraig, Brian, 1976: ‘Dr. John Carpenter: Archbishop of Dublin,
1760–1786’, Dublin Historical Record 30.1, 2–17.
McCaughey, Terence P., 1967–68: ‘ Muiris Ó Gormáin’s English-Irish phrasebook’,
Éigse 12, 203–227.
McDonald, A., 1958: Gaelic words and expressions from South Uist and Eriskay. Ed.
John Lorne Campbell. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McDonald, R., 2007: Manx kingship in its Irish Sea setting 1187–1229. Dublin: Four
Courts Press.
McLeod, Wilson, 2004: ‘“Feumaidh sinn a’ Ghàidhlig a chumail pure”: problems of
linguistic purism in Scottish Gaelic’, in: D. Ó Riagáin & T. Stolz (ed.): Purism,
second helping: papers from the conference on purism in the age of globalisation.
Bochum: Universitätsverlag Brockmeyer, 25–45.
Meek, Donald, 2004: ‘The Sublime Gael: The impact of Macpherson’s Ossian on lit-
erary creativity and cultural perception in Gaelic Scotland’, in: Howard Gaskill
(ed.): The reception of Ossian in Europe. London: Thommes, 140–166.
Meyer, Kuno, 1913: Sanas Cormaic: an Old-Irish glossary compiled by Cormac Úa
Cuilennáin. Halle: Max Niemeyer.
M‘Lauchlan, Thomas & William Skene (ed.), 1862: The Dean of Lismore’s book: a
selection of ancient Gaelic poetry from a manuscript collection made by Sir James
McGregor, Dean of Lismore, in the beginning of the sixteenth century. Edinburgh:
Edmonston and Douglas.
Moore, A.W., 1886: ‘Fin as Ossian: heroic poem with introductory notice’, Manx
notebook 2, 80–84.
Moore, A.W., 1891: The folk-lore of the Isle of Man. Douglas: Brown & Son.
Moore, A.W., 1896: Manx ballads and music. Douglas: G & R Johnson.
Moore, A.W., 1924: A vocabulary of the Anglo–Manx dialect. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
126
Peadar Ó Muircheartaigh
Morrisson, Sophia, 1911: Manx Fairy Tales. London: David Nutt.
Nagy, Joseph, 1985: The wisdom of the outlaw: the boyhood deeds of Finn in Gaelic
narrative tradition. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Nagy, Joseph. 2010: ‘Fenian female food and other health and beauty secrets’, in:
W. McLeod et al. (ed.): Bile ós chrannaibh: a Festschrift for William Gillies. Clann
Tuirc: Ceann Drochaid, 307–314.
Nevin, Monica 1993: ‘General Charles Vallancey 1725–1812’, The Journal of the
Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland 123, 19–58
Ní Mhunghaile, Lesa (ed.), 2009: Charlotte Brooke’s Reliques of Irish Poetry. Dublin:
Irish Manuscripts Commission.
Ní Mhunghaile, Lesa, 2015: ‘Charles O’Conor’s contribution to Irish-language
scholarship’, in: Luke Gibbons & Kieran O’Conor (ed.): Charles O’Conor of Bal-
linagare: life and works, Dublin: Four Courts Press, 211–226.
Ó Baoill, Dónall. 2001: ‘The historical development of <ng> in an Ulster
Irish/Scottish Gaelic continuum’, in: J.M. Kirk & D. Ó Baoill (ed.): Language
Links: the languages of Scotland and Ireland, Belfast: Queens University Belfast,
101–115.
O’Conor, Charles (ed.), 1775: The Ogygia vindicated: against the objections of Sir
George Mac Kenzie King’s advocate for Scotland in the reign of King James II (a
posthumous work) by Roderick O’Flaherty, Esq. Dublin.
O’Conor, Charles, 1783: ‘Observations on the heathen state and ancient topo-
graphy of Ireland’, Collectanea de Rebus Hibernicis 3.12, 647–675.
O’Conor, Rev. Charles, 1818: Bibliotheca ms Stowenensis: a descriptive catalogue of
the manuscripts in the Stowe library. Buckingham: Seeley.
Ó Corráin, Donnchadh, 1987: ‘Legend as critic’, in: Tom Dunne (ed.): The writer as
witness: historical studies xvi. Cork: Cork University Press, 23–38.
Ó Cuív, Brian, 1986: ‘Irish language and literature, 1691–1845’, in: T.W. Moody &
W. E. Vaughan (ed.): A new history of Ireland iv: eighteenth-century Ireland 1691–
1800. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 374–423.
Ó Duilearga, Seamus, 1942: ‘Irish stories and storytellers: some reflections and
memories’, Studies 31, 31–46.
Ó hÓgáin, Daithí, 1988: Fionn mac Cumhaill: images of a Gaelic hero. Dublin: Gill
& MacMillan.
Ó Maolalaigh, Roibeard, 2014: ‘Am buadhfhacal meadhan-aoiseach meranach
agus meran, mearanach, dàsachadh, dàsan(n)ach na Gàidhlig’, Scottish Studies 37,
183–206.
Ó Muircheartaigh, Peadar, 2014: ‘Donnchadh Bàn air a chuairt: From Glen Orchy
to London, calling at Edinburgh, Dublin and Copenhagen’, Aiste 4, 114–130.
Ó Muircheartaigh, Peadar, (forthcoming a): ‘Observations on the textual history
of Birlinn Chlann Raghnaill‘.
Ó Muircheartaigh, Peadar, (forthcoming b): ‘Rev. James McLagan and his ‘other’
manuscripts’.
Ó Murchú, Máirtín, 1989: East Perthshire Gaelic. Dublin: Dublin Institute for Ad-
vanced Studies.
Parsons, Geraldine, 2008: ‘The structure of Acallam na Senórach’, Cambrian Medi-
eval Celtic Studies 55, 11–40.
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
Fin as Ossian revisited…
127
RIA Cat. = Murphy, G. & Wulff, W., 1936: Catalogue of Irish manuscripts in the
Royal Irish Academy: fasciculus xviii. Dublin: Royal Irish Academy.
Saunders, Bailey, 1968: The life and letters of James Macpherson. New York: Haskell
House.
Stokes, Whitley, 1900: ‘Acallamh na Senórach’, in: Whitley Stokes & Ernst Win-
disch (ed.): Irische Texte mit Übersetzungen und Wörterbuch, 4th Series, Volume
1. Leipzig: S. Hirzel, 1–438.
Thomson, Derick S., 1958: ‘A catalogue and indexes of the Ossianic ballads in the
McLagan mss’, Scottish Gaelic Studies 8, 177–224.
Thomson, Derick S. 1983: ‘Gaelic: orthography’, in: D.S. Thomson (ed.): The Com-
panion to Gaelic Scotland. Oxford: Blackwell, 99–101.
Thomson, Derick S. 1994: ‘The McLagan mss in Glasgow University Library: A
Survey’, Transactions of the Gaelic Society of Inverness 58, 406–42.
Thomson, Robert L., 1960–61: ‘The Manx traditionary ballad [1]’, Études Celtiques
9, 521–548.
Thomson, Robert L., 1961: ‘McLagan manuscript 180’, Scottish Gaelic Studies 9, 9–22.
Thomson, Robert L., 1962–63: ‘The Manx traditionary ballad [2]’, Études Celtique
10, 60–87.
Thomson, Robert L., 1969: ‘The study of Manx Gaelic’, Proceedings of the British
Academy 40, 177–210.
Thomson, Robert L., 1987–89: ‘ The Revd Dr John Kelly as a lexicographer’, Proceed-
ings of the Isle of Man Natural History and Antiquarian Society 9.4, 443–458.
Wagner, Heinrich. 1953. ,Zum Manx-Wort für Feuer’, Lexis 3, 133–134.
Wagner, Heinrich, 1958: Linguistic atlas and survey of Irish dialects, volume 1. Dub-
lin: Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies.
Williams, Nicholas, 1994: ‘An Mhanainnis’, in: McCone et al. (ed.). Stair na Gaeilge
in ómós do Phádraig Ó Fiannachta. Maynooth: Roinn na Sean-Ghaeilge, Coláiste
Phádraig.
Wood, G.W., 1920: ‘Fin as Oshin: the oldest ballad in the Manx language’, Proceed-
ings of the Isle of Man Natural History and Antiquarian Society 23, 296–301.
Woolf, Alex, 2005: ‘The origins and ancestry of Somerled: Gofraid mac Fergusa and
“The Annals of the Four Masters”’, Mediaeval Scandinavia 15, 199–213.
Aberystwyth	Peadar Ó Muircheartaigh
peo5@aber.ac.uk
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM
Brought to you by | Aberystwyth University
Authenticated | peo5@aber.ac.uk author's copy
Download Date | 10/3/16 2:01 PM